“31. Interviews and Other Meetings with Members,”General Handbook: Serving in
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints(2025).

“31. Interviews and Other Meetings with Members,”General Handbook.

Jesus Christ often ministered to others one by one (see, for example,John
4:5–26;3 Nephi 17:21). He loves each of God’s children. He helps them
individually.

As a Church leader and servant of Jesus Christ, you also have opportunities to
help God’s children, individually, in their spiritual progress. One important
way you can do this is through interviews and other one-on-one meetings. Some of
your most meaningful service will happen one on one. In these settings, you can
give Christlike love, lifting up “the hands which hang down” and strengthening
“the feeble knees” (Doctrine and Covenants 81:5).

In this chapter, the terminterviewrefers to a meeting between a leader and an
individual to determine whether the person should participate in an ordinance or
receive a calling (see31.2). In general, these interviews are conducted by a
member of the bishopric or stake presidency. The terminterviewalso refers to
ministering interviews conducted by a member of the Relief Society or elders
quorum presidency (see21.3).

In addition to these interviews, there are many other reasons a Church leader
may meet with individual members (see31.3). For example, the bishopric has
regularly scheduled meetings with each youth in the ward (see31.3.1). Even if
you do not serve in a bishopric, the bishop may ask you to meet with a member
who is in need to provide ongoing support and ministering. Or a member may come
to you when he or she is facing a personal or family challenge.

This chapter can help all leaders who have opportunities to meet with individual
members. These leaders can include Relief Society, elders quorum, and Young
Women leaders, ministering brothers and sisters, or others the bishop assigns.

If you have the responsibility to meet with a member, the Lord will bless you
with the inspiration you need as you seek it. Prepare yourself spiritually
through prayer, scripture study, and righteous living. Listen to the whisperings
of the Holy Ghost. He will guide you with impressions, thoughts, and feelings.
He can help you remember teachings you have studied in the scriptures and the
words of latter-day prophets that can help the person you are meeting with
(seeDoctrine and Covenants 84:85;100:5–8).

The Gospel Library has a collection ofCounseling Resources. As you prepare to
meet with a member, consider reviewing information about topics that apply to
him or her.

The Holy Ghost can also guide the member with whom you are meeting. You might
consider inviting him or her to prepare spiritually for your meeting as well.

Consider praying with the member as you begin the meeting. This can invite a
spirit of humility and faith as you unitedly ask God for His help (seeDoctrine
and Covenants 6:32;29:6).

During the interview or meeting, an issue or question may arise that you don’t
feel prepared to address. You might suggest that you and the member each seek
the Lord’s guidance—for example, through study, prayer, and fasting. You might
also refer to relevant information inCounseling ResourcesorLife Helpin the
Gospel Library. Then you can meet again to discuss the matter further.

If the member has committed a serious sin, refer him or her to the bishop.

As a Church leader, you represent the Savior. An important part of His mission
is to communicate God’s love to His children (seeJohn 3:16–17). When members
come to you for an interview or for help with a personal challenge, often what
they need most is to know that Heavenly Father loves them. This love can
strengthen them and inspire them to come unto Christ, repent of sin, and make
good choices.

The scriptures and the words of latter-day prophets invite the Spirit and teach
pure doctrine. Use them often, with sensitivity and love, when you meet with
members. Use them to inspire and encourage, not to condemn, coerce, or cause
fear (seeLuke 9:56).

Schedule plenty of time for the meeting. The member should not feel that you are
too busy. Give him or her your full attention.

Jesus Christ took upon Himself our sins “that he might blot out [our]
transgressions according to the power of his deliverance” (Alma 7:13). He also
took upon Himself our afflictions, pain, and infirmities “that he may know … how
to succor his people” (seeAlma 7:11–12).

Encourage members to turn to Him. Help them draw upon His power to strengthen,
comfort, and redeem. This power comes by exercising faith in Jesus Christ,
following His example, receiving priesthood ordinances, keeping covenants, and
acting on promptings from the Holy Ghost.

Some members have had experiences that make them feel anxious or overwhelmed
when they meet with a Church leader. Seek ways to help them feel calm, safe, and
comfortable. Find out from the member what you can do to help.

Always give the member the option of having someone else be present during an
interview or meeting. When meeting with a member of the opposite sex, a child,
or a youth, ensure that a parent or another adult is present. He or she may join
the meeting or wait outside the room, depending on the preferences of the member
with whom you are meeting.

Usually, leaders meet with members in person for interviews and to provide
spiritual help and ministering. In deciding where to meet, leaders find a place
where the Holy Ghost can be present and they can keep confidences. This could be
a classroom or office in the meetinghouse. The leader’s or member’s home may
also be an appropriate place to meet. In determining a location, leaders
consider their own safety and the safety of the member. For information about
meeting with members virtually, see31.4.

Another important part of helping members feel safe is keeping confidences.
Reassure the member that your conversation will be confidential.

Do not share confidential information with anyone—including your spouse or other
Church leaders—unless the member gives permission. Continue to keep such matters
confidential even after you are released. Breaking confidences can harm a
member’s faith, trust, and testimony. Members are more likely to seek help from
Church leaders if they know that what they share will be kept confidential.

For more information about confidentiality, including legal information,
see32.4.4.

When meeting with a member, ask questions that help you understand his or her
situation. Give the member opportunities to express his or her thoughts and
feelings freely.

While the member is talking, listen carefully and attentively. Seek to
understand fully before responding. If needed, ask follow-up questions to be
sure you understand. But don’t probe unnecessarily.

Listening helps establish trust. It helps others feel understood, valued, and
loved. People often need someone they trust to listen as they work through
challenges. Listening can also help you open your heart to promptings from the
Holy Ghost.

Because of your love for the members, you may want to immediately offer
solutions to their problems. However, you will bless them more by helping them
find their own solutions and make their own decisions (seeDoctrine and Covenants
9:8).

Help them analyze their problems or questions within the context of the gospel
of Jesus Christ and the plan of salvation. Teach them how to seek the Lord’s
guidance through the scriptures, the words of living prophets, and personal
revelation. In this way, you help members prepare to face other challenges in
the future. They will also be better able to help others, including their
families.

Sometimes a member may seek help repenting of sin. There is much you can do to
inspire faith in Jesus Christ and encourage the member to seek forgiveness.

Only the bishop or stake president can help a person resolve serious sins. Some
of these are listed in32.6. If the member has committed any of these sins, he or
she should meet with the bishop or stake president right away.

Each bishop and stake president is “a judge in Israel” (Doctrine and Covenants
107:72). By this authority they help members repent of sin and come unto Christ,
who forgives sin (see32.1and32.3).

In these responsibilities, these leaders represent the Lord. They strive to use
“the judgment which [He] shall give unto [them]” (3 Nephi 27:27). They teach
that repentance includes exercising faith in Jesus Christ, having a contrite
spirit, forsaking sin, seeking forgiveness, making restitution, and keeping the
commandments with renewed commitment.

To help them fulfill their role, bishops and stake presidents are blessed with
the spiritual gift of discernment. This gift helps them discern truth,
understand a member’s heart, and identify his or her needs (see1 Kings
3:6–12;Doctrine and Covenants 46:27–28).

Although confession occurs with a “judge in Israel,” with permission of the
member, other leaders can give support in his or her efforts to repent. This is
especially helpful when repentance will take significant time. See the last part
of32.8.1for guidelines.

Abuse cannot be tolerated in any form. Take reports of abuse seriously. If you
become aware that someone has been abused, report the abuse to civil authorities
and counsel with the bishop. Guidelines for reporting and responding to abuse
are provided in38.6.2.

For information about what bishops and stake presidents should do when they
become aware of abuse, see38.6.2.1.

For information about helping victims of abuse, see “Abuse (Help for the
Victim)” inCounseling Resources. You can also refer members to helpfulresources
about abuseinLife Help.

For information about helping victims of rape or other sexual assault,
see38.6.18.2.

In general, Church leaders interview members to determine whether they:


- Are prepared to receive or participate in an ordinance.

- Should be called to a position in the Church.

Most interviews of this kind are conducted by a member of the bishopric or stake
presidency. They cannot be delegated to other ward leaders. However, a stake
president may delegate some interviews to high councilors as outlined in the
Chart of Callings (see30.8).

The bishop is called as “a common judge” in his ward (Doctrine and Covenants
107:74; see also7.1.3). The stake president also serves as a common judge
(see6.2.3). These leaders hold priesthood keys for authorizing ordinances. For
these reasons, there are certain interviews only they can conduct. They can
delegate other interviews to counselors. The following table lists who can
conduct each interview.

| Who can conduct the interview | Purpose of the interview |
|---|---|
| --- | --- |
| Who can conduct the interview  Bishop only | Purpose of the interview   - Issue a temple recommend to a member who is receiving his or her own endowment or being sealed to a spouse (see26.3.1). - Issue a temple recommend to a new convert (see26.4.2). - Ordain a new male convert to an office in the Aaronic Priesthood (see38.2.9.1). - Ordain a young man or a man to the office of priest (see18.10.2). - Recommend a man to be ordained an elder or high priest (see31.2.6). Approval from the stake presidency is required to conduct this interview. - Recommend a member to serve as a full-time missionary (see24.4.2). - Call a member to serve as a ward organization president. - Call a priest to serve as an assistant in the priests quorum. - Help a member repent of a serious sin (seechapter 32). - Endorse a member to enroll or continue enrollment at aChurch university or college. - Endorse a member to receive aPerpetual Education Fund loan, where available. - Allow a member to declare his or her status as a tithe payer (see34.3.1.2). - Authorize the use of fast-offering funds (see31.3.4and22.6.1). |
| Who can conduct the interview  Bishop or a counselor he assigns | Purpose of the interview   - Renew a temple recommend (see26.3.1). - Issue a temple recommend to participate in proxy baptisms and confirmations (see26.4.3). - Issue a temple recommend to be sealed to parents or to witness the sealing of siblings to parents (see26.4.4). - Call a member to serve in a ward calling as indicated in30.8. - Authorize the baptism and confirmation of an 8-year-old who is either a member of record or has a parent or guardian who is a member of the Church (see31.2.3.1). - Authorize ordination of a young man to the office of deacon or teacher (see18.10.2). - Issue a Patriarchal Blessing Recommend (see18.17). - Authorize a priesthood holder to perform a priesthood ordinance in another ward, if he does not have a temple recommend. (SeeRecommend to Perform an Ordinance form.) |
| Who can conduct the interview  Stake president only | Purpose of the interview   - Issue a temple recommend for a member who is receiving his or her own endowment or being sealed to a spouse (see26.3.1). - Recommend a member to serve as a full-time missionary (see24.4.2). - Release a full-time missionary who has returned home (see24.8.2). - When authorized, call a member to serve as a counselor in the stake presidency, a patriarch, or a bishop (see30.8.1and30.8.3). - Call a member to serve as an elders quorum president or stake Relief Society president. - Help a member repent of a serious sin (seechapter 32). |
| Who can conduct the interview  Stake president or a counselor he assigns | Purpose of the interview   - Renew a temple recommend (see26.3.1). - Authorize ordination of a man to the office of elder or high priest (see18.10.1). - Call members to serve in callings as indicated in30.8.1and30.8.3. - Verify a departing missionary’s health and worthiness shortly before he or she is set apart (see24.5.3). - Endorse a member to enroll at aChurch university or college. |


Full-time missionaries interview converts for baptism and confirmation
(see31.2.3.2).

Members of elders quorum and Relief Society presidencies conduct ministering
interviews (see21.3).

The bishop holds the priesthood keys for baptizing 8-year-old members of record
in his ward. For this reason, he or an assigned counselor interviews the
following persons for baptism:


- Children age 8 who are members of record.

- Children age 8 who are not members of record but have a member parent or
  guardian.

- Members of record ages 9 and older whose baptism was delayed due to intellectual
  disabilities.

In the interview, the bishopric member ensures that the child understands the
purposes of baptism (see2 Nephi 31:5–20). He also ensures that the child
understands the baptismal covenant and is committed to live by it (seeMosiah
18:8–10). He does not need to use a specified list of questions. This is not an
interview to determine worthiness, since “little children need no repentance”
(Moroni 8:11).

Permission of parents or guardians is required before a minor can be baptized
(see38.2.8.2).

The mission president holds the priesthood keys for baptizing converts. For this
reason, a full-time missionary interviews:


- Persons ages 9 and older who have never been baptized and confirmed.
  See31.2.3.1for an exception for those with intellectual disabilities.

- Children ages 8 and older whose parents are not members of the Church.

- Children ages 8 and older who have a parent who is also being baptized and
  confirmed.

The missionary district leader or zone leader conducts the interview. For
information about situations that require special authorization, see38.2.8.6.

Each prospective convert should also meet with the bishop before baptism.
However, the bishop does not interview him or her for baptism. Nor does he
determine worthiness. The purpose of this meeting is to build a relationship
with the person.

In the interview, the missionary follows the guidance of the Spirit to determine
whether the person meets the qualifications described inDoctrine and Covenants
20:37(see alsoMosiah 18:8–10;Moroni 6:1–4). The missionary uses the following
questions. He adapts them to the person’s age, maturity, and circumstance.

1. Do you believe that God is our Eternal Father? Do you believe that Jesus Christ
   is the Son of God and the Savior and Redeemer of the world?
2. Do you believe that the Church and gospel of Jesus Christ have been restored
   through the Prophet Joseph Smith? Do you believe that [current Church President]
   is a prophet of God? What does this mean to you?
3. What does it mean to you to repent? Do you feel that you have repented of your
   past sins?
4. You have been taught that membership in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
   Saints includes living gospel standards. What do you understand about the
   following standards? Are you willing to obey them?


   - The law of chastity, which prohibits any sexual relations outside the bonds of a
     legal marriage between a man and a woman

   - The law of tithing

   - The Word of Wisdom

   - Keeping the Sabbath day holy, including partaking of the sacrament weekly and
     serving others
5. Have you ever committed a serious crime? If so, are you now on probation or
   parole?
6. Have you ever participated in an abortion? (see38.6.1).
7. When you are baptized, you covenant with God that you are willing to take upon
   yourself the name of Christ, serve others, stand as a witness of God at all
   times, and keep His commandments throughout your life. Are you ready to make
   this covenant and strive to be faithful to it?

For instructions if the person answers affirmatively to question 5 or 6,
see38.2.8.6. See also38.2.8.7.

If the person is prepared for baptism, the interviewer fills out the Baptism and
Confirmation Record (see18.8.3).

The bishop holds the priesthood keys for conferring the Aaronic Priesthood. He
also holds the keys for ordaining to the offices of deacon, teacher, and priest.
The bishop or an assigned counselor interviews those who are to be ordained
deacons or teachers to determine if they are spiritually prepared. The bishop
interviews those who are to be ordained priests.

For more information, see18.10.2.

The temple is the house of the Lord. Entering the temple and participating in
ordinances there is a sacred privilege. This privilege is reserved for those who
are spiritually prepared and striving to live the Lord’s standards, as
determined by authorized priesthood leaders.

To make this determination, priesthood leaders interview the member using the
questions inLCR(see also the guidelines in26.3). Leaders should not add or
remove any requirements. However, they may adapt the questions to the age and
circumstances of the member.

The stake president holds the priesthood keys for conferring the Melchizedek
Priesthood. He also holds the keys for ordaining to the offices of elder and
high priest.

With the approval of the stake presidency, the bishop interviews the member
using the questions below. Before doing so, he verifies that the person’s
membership record does not include an annotation, an ordinance restriction, or a
Church membership restriction.

If, after the interview, the bishop feels the member is prepared to be ordained,
he completes and submits theMelchizedek Priesthood Ordination Record. Then a
member of the stake presidency interviews the member, also using the questions
below.

A man who receives the Melchizedek Priesthood enters into the oath and covenant
of the priesthood. This is described inDoctrine and Covenants 84:33–44. During
the interviews, the bishop and stake presidency member make sure the member
understands this oath and covenant and agrees to live by it. The leader then
asks the following questions:

1. Do you have faith in and a testimony of God, the Eternal Father; His Son, Jesus
   Christ; and the Holy Ghost?
2. Do you have a testimony of the Atonement of Jesus Christ and of His role as your
   Savior and Redeemer?
3. Do you have a testimony of the Restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ?
4. Do you sustain the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
   as the prophet, seer, and revelator and as the only person on the earth
   authorized to exercise all priesthood keys?

   Do you sustain the members of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve
   Apostles as prophets, seers, and revelators?

   Do you sustain the other General Authorities and local leaders of the Church?
5. The Lord has said that all things are to be “done in cleanliness” before Him
   (Doctrine and Covenants 42:41).

   Do you strive for moral cleanliness in your thoughts and behavior?

   Do you obey the law of chastity?
6. Do you follow the teachings of the Church of Jesus Christ in your private and
   public behavior with members of your family and others?
7. Do you support or promote any teachings, practices, or doctrine contrary to
   those of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints?
8. Do you strive to keep the Sabbath day holy, both at home and at church; attend
   your meetings; prepare for and worthily partake of the sacrament; and live your
   life in harmony with the laws and commandments of the gospel?
9. Do you strive to be honest in all that you do?
10. Are you a full-tithe payer?
11. Do you understand and obey the Word of Wisdom?
12. Do you have any financial or other obligations to a former spouse or to
    children?

    If yes, are you current in meeting those obligations?
13. Are there serious sins in your life that need to be resolved with priesthood
    authorities as part of your repentance?
14. Do you consider yourself worthy to be ordained to an office in the Melchizedek
    Priesthood?

Leaders have many opportunities to meet with members individually. For example:


- Members may ask to meet with a Church leader when they need spiritual guidance
  or have weighty personal problems. In some cases, the leader may feel prompted
  to arrange a meeting with a member. Members are discouraged from contacting
  General Authorities about personal matters (see38.8.25).

  In order to spend more time with youth, the bishop may delegate some of these
  meetings to other leaders in the ward. Members of the Relief Society, elders
  quorum, and Young Women presidencies can be particularly helpful. However, the
  bishop may not delegate matters that require his role as a common judge, such as
  repenting of serious sin.

- The bishop or someone he assigns meets with members who have temporal needs
  (see31.3.4and22.6).

- The elders quorum president meets with each quorum member individually once a
  year. They discuss the well-being of the member and his family. They also
  discuss his priesthood duties. (See8.3.3.2.)

- The Relief Society president meets with each Relief Society member once a year.
  They discuss the well-being of the sister and her family. (See9.3.2.2.)

- A member of the bishopric meets with each 11-year-old as he or she moves from
  Primary to the deacons quorum or a Young Women class. During this meeting the
  bishopric member also interviews young men to receive the Aaronic Priesthood
  (see18.10.2).

- A member of the bishopric meets with members who are entering military service
  (see38.9.2).

- A member of the bishopric meets with each youth twice a year (see31.3.1).

- A member of the bishopric meets with each young single adult at least once a
  year (see31.3.2).

- Members of the stake presidency, bishopric, and other leaders meet regularly
  with leaders who serve under their direction (see31.3.3).

When leaders meet with members, they follow the principles in31.1.

For helpful information about specific topics that may arise when meeting with
members, seeCounseling Resourcesin the Gospel Library. Leaders can also refer
members to the information inLife Help.

The bishop’s foremost responsibility is to help the rising generation in his
ward progress spiritually. One important way he does this is by meeting with the
youth individually (or with another adult present; see31.1.4). The bishop or one
of his counselors meets with each youth twice a year. At least one of these
meetings each year should be with the bishop. Beginning the year the youth turns
16, both meetings during the year should be with the bishop if possible.

In addition to these meetings, youth should feel free to counsel with the bishop
whenever they need guidance or support. The bishop strives to build strong,
trusting relationships with the youth so they feel comfortable counseling with
him.

The Young Women president also has a responsibility to minister to individual
young women. She can do this by meeting with young women one on one (or with
another adult present; see31.1.4).

When they meet with youth, leaders follow the principles in31.1. Many of these
principles are especially important when meeting with youth.

In their efforts to strengthen the youth, leaders work closely with parents.
They seek to support parents in their responsibility for teaching their children
the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Leaders share the following information with the youth and his or her parents
before their first meeting:


- Parents have the primary responsibility to teach and nurture their children.

- The bishop or one of his counselors meets with each youth at least twice a year.
  The Young Women president may also meet periodically with each young woman. In
  these meetings, leaders may answer questions, give support, extend assignments,
  and discuss topics listed in31.3.1.2.

- To help youth prepare spiritually, interviews are required for sacred matters
  such as temple recommends, priesthood ordinations, and mission calls. Leaders
  work with parents to help youth prepare for these interviews.

- Parents encourage their children to counsel with the bishop or another Church
  leader when they need help with spiritual guidance or with repentance.

- When a youth meets with a Church leader, a parent or another adult must be
  present. The youth may invite the adult to join the meeting or wait outside the
  room.

The main purpose of meetings with youth is to build faith in Heavenly Father and
Jesus Christ and help the youth follow Them. These meetings should be uplifting
spiritual experiences. Leaders strive to help each youth feel loved, encouraged,
and inspired to become more like the Savior.

The youth and the leader could discuss:


- Spiritual experiences that are building the youth’s testimony of Heavenly
  Father, Jesus Christ, and the restored gospel.

- How the youth is keeping his or her baptismal covenants.

- The youth’s preparations to make and keep temple covenants.

- The youth’s personal goals to become more like the Savior in all areas of life
  (see “Children and Youth”).

- The importance of personal and family prayer and scripture study.

- How to strengthen relationships with parents and other family members.

- The principles inFor the Strength of Youth: A Guide for Making Choices.

- Ways the youth can participate in God’s work of salvation and exaltation
  (see1.2).

- With a young man, his experiences fulfilling his priesthood duties and his
  preparation to be ordained to the next priesthood office.

- The blessings of participating in seminary.

- Preparing to serve a full-time mission (see24.0and24.3). The Lord asks every
  worthy, able young man to prepare for and serve a mission. For Latter-day Saint
  young men, missionary service is a priesthood responsibility (seeDoctrine and
  Covenants 36:1, 4–7). The Lord also welcomes worthy, able young women to serve
  missions if they desire. For young women, a mission is a powerful, but optional,
  opportunity. Preparing for a mission will bless a young woman whether she
  decides to serve as a missionary or not.

  Leaders should be sensitive toward those who may be unable to serve as full-time
  missionaries (see24.4.4).

  For information about service missions, see24.2.2.

When discussing obedience to the commandments, leaders may refer to temple
recommend interview questions and the bookletFor the Strength of Youth. They
ensure that discussions about moral cleanliness do not encourage curiosity or
experimentation.

The bishop places high priority on the spiritual progress of young single adults
in his ward. He or an assigned counselor meets with each young single adult at
least once a year.

The bishopric member and young single adult may discuss relevant items
in31.3.1.2. They could also discuss matters of special importance to young
adults, such as developing self-reliance.

Stake presidencies, bishoprics, and other leaders meet individually with members
who report to them about their callings. For example:


- The stake president meets regularly with each bishop in the stake (see6.2.1.2).

- A member of the stake presidency meets regularly with each elders quorum
  president in the stake (see8.3.1).

- The bishop meets monthly with the Relief Society president (see9.3.1). He also
  meets regularly with the elders quorum president and Young Women president
  (see8.3.1and11.3.1).

- A member of the bishopric meets regularly with the Primary president and Sunday
  School president (see12.3.1and13.2.1).

- Members of the elders quorum presidency and Relief Society presidency meet with
  ministering brothers and ministering sisters (see21.3).

In these meetings, the leader inspires and instructs the member in his or her
responsibilities. The leader expresses gratitude for the member’s service and
offers encouragement. The member reports on the progress and well-being of the
people he or she serves. Together they discuss goals, challenges, and
opportunities. As applicable, they also review budgets and expenses.

Caring for those in need is part of God’s work of salvation and exaltation
(see1.2). As leaders meet with members who have temporal needs, they help them
address short-term needs and build long-term self-reliance (see22.3).

The bishop may assign others in the ward, such as the Relief Society and elders
quorum presidencies, to meet with members who have temporal needs. However, only
the bishop can approve the use of fast-offering funds (see22.6.1).

Additional principles and policies for helping those with temporal needs are
described inchapter 22.

Church leaders should not counsel a person whom to marry. Nor should they
counsel a person whether or not to divorce his or her spouse. While divorce is
an appropriate option in some situations, such decisions must remain with the
individual.

Following the guidance of the Spirit, Church leaders often meet with couples and
individuals who are separating or getting a divorce. Leaders can also seek to
help a couple strengthen their marriage. They teach about the strength and
healing that come from keeping covenants they have made with the Lord and living
His teachings. These teachings include faith, repentance, forgiveness, love, and
prayer.

A member who is separated from his or her spouse or is going through a divorce
should not date until the divorce is final.

Church leaders are not called to be professional counselors or to provide
therapy. The assistance they give is spiritual, focusing on the strengthening,
comforting, redeeming power of Jesus Christ. In addition to this important and
inspired help, some members may benefit from professional counseling where it is
available. Such counseling or therapy can help members understand and respond to
life’s challenges in healthy ways.

Meeting with a professional counselor to gain insight and skills for emotional
well-being is not a sign of weakness. Rather, it can be a sign of humility and
strength.

Members should carefully select reputable professional counselors who have
applicable licensing. Counselors should respect the agency, values, and beliefs
of those seeking help. Incorporating these values is ethically appropriate in
professional counseling.

When members seek counseling about physical intimacy, bishops may refer them to
professionals who specialize in such counseling and whose beliefs and practices
are consistent with Church doctrine.

The Church opposes any therapy, including conversion or reparative therapy for
sexual orientation or gender identity, that subjects a person to abusive
practices. (See “Same-Sex Attraction” and “Transgender” inLife Help.)

In the United States and Canada, bishops and stake presidents may contact Family
Services to identify resources to provide professional counseling in harmony
with gospel principles. Contact information is given below:

1-801-240-1711

1-800-453-3860, extension 2-1711

FamilyServices.ChurchofJesusChrist.org

In other areas, leaders may contact Family Services staff or the welfare and
self-reliance manager in the area office.

If members cannot pay for professional counseling on their own or through
insurance, bishops may use fast offerings to assist (see22.4).

Usually, leaders meet with members in person for interviews and to provide
spiritual help and ministering. When meeting in person is not practical, leaders
can meet with members virtually for interviews and to provide spiritual help and
ministering.

Interviews and other meetings between leaders and members should not be
recorded.

As with in-person interviews and meetings, the member may invite someone else to
be present during a virtual interview or meeting.

When an interview for a temple recommend is held virtually, the leader digitally
signs the recommend if the member is worthy. A member of the bishopric or the
branch president then prints the recommend and gives it to the member.