“7. The Bishopric,”General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints(2025).

“7. The Bishopric,”General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints.

The bishop holds the priesthood keys to lead the work of the Church in the ward
(see3.4.1). He and his counselors form a bishopric. They receive guidance from
the stake presidency. They care for ward members with love, helping them become
true followers of Jesus Christ (seeMoroni 7:48).

The bishop and his counselors are high priests. If they are not high priests
when they are called, they should be ordained high priests before they are set
apart to serve.

The bishop has five principal responsibilities:


- He is the presiding high priest in the ward.

- He is president of the Aaronic Priesthood.

- He is a common judge.

- He coordinates God’s work of salvation and exaltation in the ward, including
  caring for those in need.

- He oversees records, finances, and the use of the meetinghouse.

Because the bishop holds priesthood keys, he has the right to receive revelation
for the ward (seeDoctrine and Covenants 128:11). Therefore, some
responsibilities are his alone. These are described in this chapter.

The bishop’s foremost responsibility is to the rising generation in the ward
(the children, youth, and young single adults). To enable him to concentrate on
this responsibility, he delegates many assignments (see4.2.5). He may delegate
to his counselors, the clerk and assistant clerks, the executive secretary,
quorum and organization leaders, and others.

If the bishop is unable to perform his responsibilities, a counselor may act in
his place temporarily, except as noted in this handbook. The bishop or his
counselor consults with the stake president if he has questions about the
counselor acting for the bishop.

The bishop is the ward’s primary spiritual leader. He sets an example by serving
“with holiness of heart” (Mosiah 18:12). He teaches, uplifts, and inspires
(seeMatthew 20:28). He follows the principles of leadership inDoctrine and
Covenants 121:34–46.

A bishop is a faithful disciple of Jesus Christ. He is true to his covenants. He
is loyal to his wife and family. He sets an example of righteousness for his
family, the ward, and the community. (See1 Timothy 3:2–7.) His counselors are
men of similar character.

The bishop provides guidance and counsel to other leaders in the ward. He
encourages them in their responsibilities.

The bishop has responsibility for the ward Relief Society and Young Women
organizations. He assigns his counselors responsibility for the Sunday School
and Primary organizations and other ward programs. (See9.3.1,11.3.1,12.3.1,
and13.2.1.)

The bishop’s responsibilities for Aaronic Priesthood quorums are outlined
in7.1.2. His responsibilities for elders quorums are outlined in8.3.1.

The bishop also guides the elders quorum and Relief Society presidents in
overseeing ministering. He meets with these two presidents together at least
quarterly to address the needs of individuals and families (see21.2).

The bishop directs the administration of the following ordinances and blessings
in the ward:


- The sacrament

- Naming and blessing of children

- Baptism and confirmation of 8-year-old children of record (for those with
  intellectual disabilities, see38.2.8.1; for converts, see31.2.3.2)

- Conferral of the Aaronic Priesthood and ordination to the offices of deacon,
  teacher, and priest

For information about ordinances and blessings, seechapter 18.

The bishop leads the ward council and the ward youth council
(see29.2.5and29.2.6). He uses these councils to help coordinate God’s work of
salvation and exaltation in the ward. He delegates much of this work and follows
up on assignments (see4.2.5).

The bishop invites leaders to counsel together about how to build spiritual
strength and unity in the ward. He encourages all council members to seek
inspiration and participate in discussions. (SeeDoctrine and Covenants 88:122;
see also4.4in this handbook.)

The bishopric plans sacrament meetings and other ward meetings listed inchapter
29. The bishop presides at ward meetings unless a member of the stake
presidency, an Area Seventy in his area, or a General Authority attends. The
bishop’s counselors may conduct these meetings. They also preside if the bishop
is absent.

The bishop’s responsibilities for callings and releases are outlined inchapter
30. He may assign his counselors to extend callings and releases as outlined
in30.8.

“The bishopric is the presidency of [the Aaronic] priesthood, and holds the keys
or authority of the same” (Doctrine and Covenants 107:15; see alsoverse 20). The
bishop has the following responsibilities as the president of the Aaronic
Priesthood in the ward. His counselors assist him.


- Support parents in teaching youth. Help youth serve faithfully, make and keep
  sacred covenants, and prepare to receive the ordinances of the temple. Help
  young men prepare to be ordained to priesthood offices and to serve full-time
  missions. If young women desire to serve full-time missions, help them prepare.
  The Children and Youth program can help in these efforts
  (seeChildrenandYouth.ChurchofJesusChrist.org).

- Oversee Aaronic Priesthood quorums and Young Women classes. The bishop is
  president of the priests quorum (seeDoctrine and Covenants 107:87–88). His first
  counselor has responsibility for the teachers quorum. His second counselor has
  responsibility for the deacons quorum. For more information about Aaronic
  Priesthood quorum leadership, see10.3,10.4, and10.5.

- Counsel with the ward Young Women president. The bishop does not delegate this
  assignment to a counselor. He and his counselors also regularly participate in
  Young Women meetings, service, and activities. (See11.3.1.)

- Meet regularly with each youth. For guidelines about these meetings, see31.3.1.

- Support families and Primary leaders and teachers in their efforts to help
  children make and keep covenants (seechapter 12).

The bishop is the common judge in the ward (seeDoctrine and Covenants
107:71–74). He strives to follow the example of the Savior as a righteous judge
(see3 Nephi 27:27). He has the following responsibilities:


- Help youth and adults qualify for and be worthy of a temple recommend.

- Conduct interviews as outlined in31.2. He may authorize his counselors to
  conduct certain interviews (see31.2.2). For guidelines, see31.1.

- Meet with ward members who seek spiritual guidance, who have weighty personal
  problems, or who have committed serious sins, helping them draw on the healing
  power of Jesus Christ. The bishop may ask his counselors, elders quorum and
  Relief Society presidents, and others to meet with ward members about some
  matters. However, only the bishop meets with ward members about matters of
  worthiness, abuse, and approval to use fast-offering funds. For guidelines,
  see31.1.

- Under the direction of the stake president, hold membership councils as needed.
  For guidelines, seechapter 32.

The bishop coordinates God’s work of salvation and exaltation in the ward
(seechapter 1). His counselors and other ward leaders assist him.

The bishop helps members live the gospel. He helps them strengthen their faith
in Heavenly Father and in Jesus Christ and His Atonement (seeDoctrine and
Covenants 20:29). He teaches them to pray and study the scriptures. He invites
them to make covenants by receiving the ordinances of salvation and exaltation.
He encourages them to keep their covenants.

The bishop strengthens Church members. He encourages families to participate in
regular family prayer and learn the gospel together, including in home evening.
He teaches them to love and serve one another. He teaches by word and example
that Church callings can be fulfilled without detracting from family
responsibilities. He ensures that Church activities support parents’ efforts to
raise their children in righteousness.

In addition to helping members live the gospel, the bishop has other
responsibilities in coordinating God’s work of salvation and exaltation in the
ward. For example, he:


- Helps men prepare to be ordained to priesthood offices.

- Leads efforts to care for those in need in the ward (see7.1.4.1and22.2.1).

- Guides the elders quorum and Relief Society presidencies as they lead
  ministering efforts in the ward (see21.2.1).

- Coordinates the work of the elders quorum and Relief Society presidencies as
  they lead the ward’s efforts to share the gospel and strengthen new and
  returning members (see23.1).

- Coordinates the efforts of the elders quorum and Relief Society presidencies as
  they lead temple and family history work in the ward (see25.2).

- Helps members prepare to receive a temple recommend and temple ordinances
  (see27.1).

The bishop has a divine mandate to seek out and care for those with temporal
needs (seeDoctrine and Covenants 84:112). He delegates much of this work to the
Relief Society and elders quorum presidencies.

Some duties are performed only by the bishop. For example, he determines the
type, amount, and duration of any temporal assistance provided by the Church. In
doing so, he often consults with the Relief Society and elders quorum
presidents. For more information, see22.4and22.5.

Members of the bishopric teach the principles of caring for those in need and
building self-reliance (see22.1). They also teach the law of the fast
(see22.2.2). They oversee the gathering of fast offerings (see34.3.2).

The bishop instructs other ward leaders in their responsibilities to care for
those in need. He also leads the ward council in these efforts.

For more information about how the bishop cares for those in need, see22.6.1.

The bishop oversees ward records, ward finances, and the meetinghouse. This
includes his responsibility to teach tithing and the law of the fast and to
conduct tithing declaration (see34.3.1.2; see alsoDoctrine and Covenants
107:68).

The bishop may assign much of the work with records and finances to his
counselors and clerks. He may assign one of his counselors to serve as the ward
building representative, or he may call another member to do so.

For information about records, seechapter 33. For information about finances,
including tithing, seechapter 34. For information about meetinghouses,
seechapter 35.

In a branch, a Melchizedek Priesthood holder is called as the branch president.
He holds the priesthood keys needed to preside (see3.4.1.1). He and his
counselors serve much like a bishopric but with the following differences:


- A branch president may be either an elder or a high priest. A bishop must be a
  high priest.

- A branch president is not set apart as a presiding high priest. However, he
  presides over the branch and has all of the responsibilities described in7.1.1.

- A branch president does not need to be married.

- Counselors in a branch presidency may not issue temple recommends (see26.3.1).

The bishopric recommends a Melchizedek Priesthood holder to serve as ward
executive secretary. They make this recommendation to the stake presidency. The
executive secretary should have a current temple recommend. He is called and set
apart by a member of the stake presidency or an assigned high councilor.

The executive secretary works closely with the bishop and his counselors, but he
is not a member of the bishopric. He has the following responsibilities:


- Meet with the bishopric and prepare agendas as assigned.

- Serve as a member of the ward council and attend ward council meetings. As
  directed by the bishopric, follow up on assignments made in these meetings.

- Schedule appointments for the bishopric.

- Schedule interviews for youth and adults who need to renew their temple
  recommends.

- If assigned by the bishopric, coordinate the ward’s efforts to help members
  access Church magazines (see38.8.7).

- Help the bishopric with seminary and institute matters, such as helping ward
  members register for classes (seechapter 15).

- Keep a current list of names and addresses of ward members who are in the
  military. Ensure that ward leaders are aware of these members (see38.9.2).
  Inform the stake executive secretary when members plan to enter the military.

- Forward messages received from Church employees and volunteers to the
  appropriate ward leaders, as instructed by the bishop (see38.8.9).

One or two assistant ward executive secretaries may be called as needed. They
are recommended by the bishopric and called and set apart by a member of the
stake presidency or an assigned high councilor. These brethren should have a
current temple recommend.

The bishop recommends a Melchizedek Priesthood holder to serve as ward clerk. He
makes this recommendation to the stake presidency. The clerk should have a
current temple recommend. He is called and set apart by a member of the stake
presidency or an assigned high councilor. He is a member of the ward council.

Assistant ward clerks may also be called (see33.4.3). They are called and set
apart by a member of the stake presidency or an assigned high councilor.

Clerks work closely with the bishop and his counselors, but they are not members
of the bishopric. The responsibilities of the ward clerk and assistant ward
clerks are outlined in33.4.2and33.4.3.