“17. Teaching the Gospel,”General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints(2025).

“17. Teaching the Gospel,”General Handbook.

We teach the gospel to help people strengthen their faith in Heavenly Father and
Jesus Christ. We seek to help people become more like the Savior, receive His
power in their lives, and ultimately obtain eternal life. When the word of God
is taught and received by the Spirit, it has the power to change hearts and
inspire conversion. It has a “more powerful effect upon the minds of the people
than … anything else” (Alma 31:5).

When teaching the gospel, parents, teachers, and leaders follow the example of
Jesus Christ, who is the Master Teacher. Teaching in the Savior’s way is a
sacred trust and responsibility.

Leaders share the following principles of Christlike teaching with teachers in
their organizations. These principles are explained in more detail inTeaching in
the Savior’s Way.

3:45

Everything the Savior does is an expression of His love (see2 Nephi 26:24).
Leaders and teachers follow His example by showing love for those they teach.
They pray for those they teach by name, seek to connect with and understand
them, and focus on individual needs. They reach out to members of their class or
quorum who do not attend.

3:19

To inspire people to have faith in Jesus Christ, teachers must teach by the
Spirit. Teachers seek the Spirit’s guidance as they prepare and teach, and they
strive to live worthy of His influence each day.

3:47

The Savior taught His Father’s doctrine. Following the Savior’s example,
teachers focus on the essential, saving truths of the gospel. They teach using
the scriptures, the teachings of latter-day prophets, and approved curriculum
materials. Teachers lead inspired discussions and ensure that their teaching is
edifying and doctrinally sound. Approved materials are listed in the
currentInstructions for CurriculumonChurchofJesusChrist.org.

3:33

Teachers encourage members to be responsible for their own learning. They
support members in their efforts to learn the gospel individually and with their
families. They invite members to share what they are learning and to act on it.
A person’s faith grows when he or she actively participates in learning the
gospel and applies its principles in daily life.

To become converted to the Lord Jesus Christ, each member of the Church is
responsible to learn the gospel for himself or herself. In addition, parents are
responsible to teach the gospel to their children. Gospel learning and teaching
should be centered in the home. Church leaders and teachers encourage and
support home-centered gospel learning and teaching.

Leaders and teachers encourage members to seek their own inspiration about how
to study and teach the gospel. Their main resources should be the scriptures and
general conference messages. Supporting resources can includeCome, Follow
MeandChurch magazines.

3:35

Leaders are responsible for teaching and learning in their organizations. Some
of the ways they fulfill this responsibility are outlined below.


- Set an example by learning the gospel and teaching it in the Savior’s way.

- Ensure that the teaching in their organizations builds faith and is doctrinally
  correct.

- If leaders are members of the ward council, discuss with other council members
  how to improve gospel learning and teaching in the ward. The bishop may invite
  the Sunday School president to lead these discussions.

- As needed, recommend names to the bishopric of ward members to call as teachers
  in their organizations, following the guidelines in30.1.

- Meet with newly called teachers and help them prepare for their callings
  (seeTeaching in the Savior’s Way,40).

- Give ongoing support to the teachers in their organizations. Talk to the
  teachers regularly about their efforts to build faith in the people they teach.
  If needed, ask the Sunday School president for help.

In teacher council meetings, teachers counsel together about principles of
Christlike teaching. They also counsel about how to improve gospel learning and
teaching. They useTeaching in the Savior’s Wayas a resource.

Teacher council meetings are held quarterly during the 50-minute class time on
Sunday.


- Meetings for priesthood, Relief Society, and Young Women teachers can be held on
  a first or third Sunday.

- Meetings for Sunday School teachers can be held on a second or fourth Sunday.

The Primary presidency counsels with a member of the bishopric to determine how
to strengthen teaching in the Primary. The Sunday School president can help as
needed. Some options are listed below:


- Primary teachers could attend teacher council meetings with teachers from other
  organizations.

- Separate teacher council meetings could be held for Primary teachers. These
  meetings could be held during the 20-minute Primary singing time. As an
  alternative, they could be held before or after regular Sunday meetings or on
  another day during the week.

- Members of the Primary presidency could visit Primary classes and counsel with
  teachers afterward about teaching in the Savior’s way.

The ward council oversees and schedules teacher council meetings. A member of
the Sunday School presidency usually leads the meetings. However, the bishopric
may ask another member to lead them.

For more information, see “Teacher Council Meetings” inTeaching in the Savior’s
Way(pages 38–39).

6:7

The ward council may organize teacher council meetings for parents to help them
improve gospel teaching in the home. Like other teacher council meetings, these
are held during the 50-minute class time on Sunday.

In these meetings, parents counsel together about how to apply principles of
Christlike teaching as they teach their children. They useTeaching in the
Savior’s Wayas a resource, including the section titled “Home and Family” (pages
30–31). They can also discuss the teaching and scripture study suggestions
inCome, Follow Me, such as the section titled “Preparing Your Children for a
Lifetime on God’s Covenant Path.”

The ward council oversees and schedules teacher council meetings for parents.
They determine whether to invite specific parents to attend or to extend an
invitation to all parents in the ward.

A member of the Sunday School presidency usually leads the meetings. However,
the bishopric may ask another member to lead them.

For more information, see “Teacher Council Meetings” inTeaching in the Savior’s
Way(pages 38–39).