“29. Meetings in the Church,” General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints (2024).

“29. Meetings in the Church,” General Handbook.

![mother and daughter at sacrament
meeting](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/imgs/e44a87cd4b2b11eda354eeeeac1ee44242b1665f/full/%21100%2C/0/default)

29.

# Meetings in the Church

29.0

## Introduction

Latter-day Saints meet together to worship, edify each other, and teach and
learn the gospel (see Alma 6:6; Moroni 6:5–6). The Savior promised, “Where two
or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them”
(Matthew 18:20). Meeting together is one way our hearts can be “knit together
in unity and in love” (Mosiah 18:21).

Leadership meetings help leaders counsel together and coordinate efforts to
serve others. However, holding a meeting should never replace serving and
ministering as Jesus Christ did. Ways to assist God in His work of salvation
and exaltation can be planned in a meeting, but these are most often
accomplished outside of the meeting.

29.1

## Planning and Conducting Meetings

Leaders plan and conduct meetings “as they are led by the Holy Ghost,
according to the commandments and revelations of God” (Doctrine and Covenants
20:45; see also Moroni 6:9; Doctrine and Covenants 46:2). They seek ways to
invite the influence of the Spirit in their meetings.

Leaders ensure that the number and length of meetings do not create burdens
for members or their families. For example, meetings should not make it
difficult for families to have time together on the Sabbath day.

Leaders also ensure that meetings focus on what is most important. For
example, sacrament meetings should focus on the sacrament and building faith
in Jesus Christ. Presidency meetings and council meetings focus on
strengthening individuals and families.

The presiding officer may conduct the meeting. Or he or she may ask someone
else, such as a counselor, to conduct under his or her direction.

Occasionally something happens during a meeting that the presiding officer
feels a need to clarify. For example, someone might teach incorrect doctrine.
If that happens, the presiding officer should make a clarification without
embarrassing anyone.

29.2

## Ward Meetings

29.2.1

### Sacrament Meeting

Purposes

Remember Jesus Christ by partaking of the sacrament. In this ordinance, Church
members renew their covenant to take upon themselves the Savior’s name, to
always remember Him, and to keep His commandments. Other purposes include
worshipping, building faith and testimony, and conducting ward business.

Participants

All are invited to attend (see 3 Nephi 18:30–32; see also 38.1.1 in this
handbook).

Frequency

Each Sunday.

29.2.1.1

#### Planning Sacrament Meeting

The bishopric plans and conducts sacrament meeting. They ensure that the focus
of the meeting is on the sacrament and building faith in Jesus Christ.

Sacrament meeting lasts one hour. It can include the following:

  1. _Prelude music_ (see 19.3.2 for guidelines). Reverent music before the meeting starts can invite a spirit of worship.

  2. _Greeting and welcome._

  3. _Acknowledgment of presiding authorities or other leaders who are visiting._ Presiding authorities and visiting high councilors should be invited to sit on the stand. General Officers are also invited to sit on the stand unless they are attending their home ward.

  4. _Announcements._ These should be kept to a minimum. Most can be printed, shared electronically, or shared in other meetings.

  5. _Opening hymn and prayer._ See 19.3.2 and 29.6.

  6. _Ward and stake business,_ such as the following:

    * Sustaining and releasing officers and teachers (see 30.3 and 30.6).

    * Presenting names of brethren to be ordained to an office in the Aaronic Priesthood (see 18.10.3).

    * Recognizing new ward members, including recent converts. After a few words of introduction, the person conducting asks the congregation to show by an uplifted hand that they welcome the member into the ward.

When children who are members of record are baptized and confirmed, they are
recognized in sacrament meeting. However, they do not need to be presented for
welcome into the ward.

  7. _Naming and blessing children_ (see 18.6). This is usually done in fast and testimony meeting (see 29.2.2).

  8. _Confirming new converts_ (see 18.8).

  9. _Sacrament hymn and administration of the sacrament._ The sacrament is the main focus of the meeting. Other parts of the meeting should not detract from it. This ordinance is an opportunity for members to direct their thoughts toward the Savior and His sacrifice for them. It should be a sacred time of spiritual renewal.

The sacrament table should be prepared before the meeting begins. The bishop
ensures that the sacrament is blessed and passed in a reverent and orderly
way. Those who administer the sacrament represent Jesus Christ.

For more about preparing, blessing, and passing the sacrament, see 18.9.

For information about administering the sacrament in unusual situations, see
29.2.1.5 and 18.9.1.

  10. _Gospel messages and congregational singing or other music._ Messages and music should be consistent with the sacred nature of the sacrament. For information about selecting speakers, see 29.2.1.4. For information about musical selections in sacrament meeting, see 19.3.2.

  11. _Closing hymn and prayer._

  12. _Postlude music._

Visual aids and audiovisual materials should not be used in sacrament meetings
(see 38.8.3).

29.2.1.2

#### Presiding at Sacrament Meeting

The bishop presides at sacrament meeting unless a member of the stake
presidency, an Area Seventy in his area, or a General Authority attends. If
the bishop and his counselors are not able to attend sacrament meeting, the
stake president designates who presides. Normally he designates the elders
quorum president. However, he could invite another Melchizedek Priesthood
holder.

29.2.1.3

#### Time before the Meeting

Before the meeting starts, members of the congregation prepare spiritually for
the sacrament. They can do this through quiet prayer and pondering. Leaders
set an example of reverence.

A member of the bishopric invites Young Women class presidencies to organize
youth to minister by welcoming visitors and members as they enter the chapel.
Youth make an effort to greet members by name. They also promote reverence by
answering questions and helping people find seats as needed.

29.2.1.4

#### Selecting Speakers

The bishopric selects speakers for sacrament meeting. Most often they invite
ward members, including youth and children (see 38.8.18). The stake president
may assign high councilors or members of stake organization presidencies to
speak. The stake president determines the frequency of such assignments.

The bishopric extends invitations to speak well in advance of the meeting.
Speakers bear testimony of Jesus Christ and teach His gospel using the
scriptures (see Doctrine and Covenants 42:12; 52:9). Messages should build
faith and be consistent with the sacred nature of the sacrament.

For information about newly called or recently returned missionaries speaking
in sacrament meeting, see 24.5.2 and 24.8.3.

The bishopric schedules one sacrament meeting each year for a presentation by
the Primary children. For information about this presentation, see 12.1.6.

![man speaking over the
pulpit](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/imgs/21ffd0934b3011ed8234eeeeac1e2c0e548462f7/full/%21500%2C/0/default)

29.2.1.5

####  Sacrament Services in Unusual Situations

Every member needs the spiritual blessings that come from partaking of the
sacrament. However, some members are unable to attend sacrament meeting
because they are confined to their home, a hospital, or a care facility. The
bishop may assign priesthood holders to administer the sacrament to these
members (see 18.9.1).

In some cases, the bishop may authorize streaming sacrament meeting for those
who cannot attend. For information, see 29.7.

When members are traveling or temporarily living away from home, they should
attend sacrament meeting in a nearby ward if possible. Sacrament services
should not be held in conjunction with family reunions, vacations, or other
activities that are not sponsored by the Church.

29.2.2

### Fast and Testimony Meeting

Purpose

Partake of the sacrament and strengthen one another by bearing testimony of
Jesus Christ and His gospel. Members are encouraged to come to the meeting
fasting if they are able to fast.

Participants

All are invited to attend.

Frequency

Once a month, sacrament meeting is a fast and testimony meeting. Usually this
is on the first Sunday of the month. It may be on a different Sunday to
accommodate general conference or stake conference. (See also 20.5.4.)

In a fast and testimony meeting, there are no assigned speakers or special
musical selections. Instead, the person conducting bears a brief testimony. He
then invites members of the congregation to bear their testimonies. To bear
testimony means to declare gospel truths as inspired by the Holy Ghost.
Testimonies should be brief so that many people can participate.

Young children are welcome to bear testimony in fast and testimony meeting. It
may be best for them to learn to do so at home until they can bear testimony
without help from others.

Under the bishop’s direction, children are usually named and blessed during
fast and testimony meeting (see 29.2.1.1).

29.2.3

### Ward Conference

Purpose

At ward conference, stake leaders instruct, support, and minister to ward
leaders and members. Ward members sustain general and local leaders.

Participants

All are invited to attend. Participants from the stake are determined by the
stake presidency.

Frequency

Once a year on a Sunday other than fast Sunday.

Ward conference is planned to meet local needs. It includes a sacrament
meeting planned by the stake president. The stake president usually presides
at the meeting, and a member of the bishopric usually conducts.

During this meeting, a member of the stake presidency or high council presents
the names of general, stake, and ward leaders for sustaining. He uses the
Officers Sustained form, prepared by the ward clerk. The bishop and stake
president usually speak in the meeting.

The ward holds regular priesthood and organization meetings as part of ward
conference. Stake leaders may give instruction and assistance. They minister
to ward leaders and members.

In connection with ward conference, the stake presidency meets with the
bishopric. Together they review the progress of God’s work of salvation and
exaltation in the ward. This meeting may be held on ward conference Sunday or
at another time.

29.2.4

### Bishopric Meeting

Purpose

Counsel together and make decisions about matters concerning the ward. Give
special attention to the bishopric’s responsibility for Aaronic Priesthood
holders and young women.

Participants

The bishopric, ward clerk, and executive secretary. The bishop may invite
others to attend as needed, such as the elders quorum and Relief Society
presidents.

Frequency

Usually weekly.

The bishop plans and conducts bishopric meetings. Matters for consideration
could include:

  * Coordinating God’s work of salvation and exaltation in the ward.

  * Strengthening individuals and families in the ward—especially youth and children.

  * Identifying members who could prepare to receive ordinances, including priesthood ordinations.

  * Identifying members to call to ward positions.

  * Identifying members who could be recommended to the stake president to serve as missionaries.

  * Reviewing instructions from the scriptures, Church leaders, and this handbook.

Other items may include ward organizations and programs, the ward budget,
reports on assignments, and plans for upcoming meetings and activities.

![ward council
meeting](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/imgs/1ca2ad224b3011ed9603eeeeac1e5884c15ef3a4/full/%21500%2C/0/default)

29.2.5

### Ward Council Meeting

Purpose

Help accomplish God’s work of salvation and exaltation in the ward (see 1.2).

Participants

  * The bishopric, ward clerk, and ward executive secretary.

  * Presidents of the elders quorum, Relief Society, Young Women, Primary, and Sunday School.

The bishop may invite others to attend, such as the ward mission leader, the
ward temple and family history leader, the leaders of the ward young single
adult committee, the ward music coordinator, and the full-time missionaries.

Frequency

Usually weekly (but may meet less often).

The bishop plans, presides over, and conducts ward council meetings. If he is
absent, he may assign a counselor to preside and conduct. However, the council
does not make major decisions without the bishop.

The ward council seeks to help all ward members build spiritual strength,
receive saving ordinances, keep covenants, and become consecrated followers of
Jesus Christ (see Moroni 6:4–5). During ward council meetings, council members
plan and coordinate this work. They determine together how the strengths and
abilities of ward members can bless those in need. They seek the guidance of
the Spirit as they unite in love and concern for members of the ward.

Ward organization leaders attend ward council meetings in two capacities:

  1. As members of the ward council who help bless all ward members.

  2. As representatives of their organizations.

When they meet together, ward council members discuss matters that would
benefit from unified efforts of the entire council. Each council member is
encouraged to share his or her thoughts and inspiration on these matters.

Ward council meetings usually do not last longer than one hour. They begin
with a prayer and brief reports on assignments from previous meetings. Listed
below are items that could be discussed. There is not enough time to discuss
all of them in every meeting. The bishop gives priority to matters that are
most needed to bless individuals and families.

  * _Living the gospel of Jesus Christ._ Helping all members build faith, receive saving ordinances, and keep their covenants.

  * _Caring for those in need._ Sharing resources and skills to bless individuals, families, and the community. Helping ward members become self-reliant. (See chapter 22.)

  * _Inviting all to receive the gospel._ Reviewing the progress of those who are learning about the gospel, as well as new and returning members. Discussing ways members can share the gospel with others. (See chapter 23.)

  * _Uniting families for eternity._ Reviewing the progress of members who are preparing to receive temple ordinances. Planning ways to help more members qualify for a temple recommend. Discussing ways members can participate in temple and family history work. (See chapter 25.)

As ward council members discuss these matters, they consider the needs and
strengths of the members they serve. They can learn about these needs and
strengths in presidency meetings, in discussions with members of their
organization (including ministering interviews), and through their own
ministering efforts. In addition, Leader and Clerk Resources has tools and
reports that can help leaders be aware of the progress of members. Council
members must keep confidential any private or sensitive information (see
4.4.6).

The ward council should know the children and youth in the ward and their home
circumstances. They pay particular attention to those who do not have gospel
support at home.

After a discussion, the bishop may either decide on a course of action or
postpone a decision while seeking additional information and guidance. Or he
could refer the matter to a different council, such as the bishopric. See
4.4.3.

Sometimes the ward council may determine that a ward activity could help meet
the needs of members. The ward council may oversee the planning of ward
activities. However, most of the planning is done before and after council
meetings. For more information about activities, see chapter 20.

After full-time missionaries return home, they may be invited to report on
their missions to the ward council (see 24.8.3).

To understand principles that guide council meetings in the Church, all
council members should study 4.3 and 4.4.

![](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/imgs/https%3A%2F%2Fwww.churchofjesuschrist.org%2Fimgs%2F51d4964c9ddf04b8ea5c3ef4a4edf0565c3f17ae%2Ffull%2F%2521768%252C%2F0%2Fdefault/full/!250,/0/default)

4:37

Ward Council Meeting

29.2.6

### Ward Youth Council Meeting

Purpose

Strengthen the youth in the ward. Help them participate in God’s work of
salvation and exaltation (see 1.2).

Participants

  * The bishopric.

  * One of the bishop’s assistants in the priests quorum and the teachers and deacons quorum presidents.

  * The Young Women class presidents (or the entire presidency if the ward has just one Young Women class).

  * The Young Women president.

The bishop may invite other youth leaders or advisers to attend as needed.

Frequency

Usually monthly.

The bishop may conduct ward youth council meetings. Or he may assign someone
else to do so, such as one of his priests quorum assistants or the president
of the oldest Young Women class. Ward youth council meetings provide
opportunities for youth to lead. The bishopric or other leaders can help them
prepare for these meetings during quorum or class presidency meetings.

Before each meeting, the bishop and the person conducting review the items to
be discussed. These items could include the following:

  * God’s work of salvation and exaltation.

  * Needs of youth in the ward and ways to address them.

  * Efforts to reach out to youth who are less active or new members.

  * Activities, including opportunities to serve those in need. Most of the planning is done in quorum or class presidency meetings (see chapter 20).

  * Ministering (see chapter 21).

  * Orienting newly called quorum and class presidencies.

To understand principles that guide council meetings in the Church, all
council members should study 4.3 and 4.4.

29.2.7

### Other Ward Meetings and Classes

Meetings for priesthood quorums and their presidencies are described in
chapters 8 and 10.

Meetings for Relief Society sisters and their leaders are described in chapter
9.

Meetings for young women and their leaders are described in chapter 11.

Meetings for Primary children and their leaders are described in chapter 12.

Sunday School classes are described in 13.3.

Teacher council meetings are described in 17.4.

Coordination meetings for the work of sharing the gospel and strengthening new
and returning members are described in 23.4.

Coordination meetings for temple and family history work are described in
25.2.7.

![council
meeting](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/imgs/13cbcc454b3011ed88eaeeeeac1e572163796720/full/%21500%2C/0/default)

29.2.8

###  Schedules for Sunday Meetings

Wards use one of the following two-hour schedules for Sunday meetings.

Plan 1

60 minutes

|

Sacrament meeting  
  
---|---  
  
10 minutes

|

Transition to classes and meetings  
  
50 minutes

|

All Sundays: Primary, including nursery (see 12.2.1.2)

First and third Sundays of the month: Sunday School (see 13.3)

Second and fourth Sundays: priesthood quorum meetings (see 8.2.1.2 and
10.2.1.2), Relief Society meetings (see 9.2.1.2), and Young Women meetings
(see 11.2.1.2)

Fifth Sundays: meetings for youth and adults. The bishopric determines the
topic and assigns teachers (usually members of the ward or stake). They also
determine whether youth and adults, male and female, meet separately or
together.  
  
Plan 2

50 minutes

|

All Sundays: Primary, including nursery (see 12.2.1.2)

First and third Sundays of the month: Sunday School (see 13.3)

Second and fourth Sundays: priesthood quorum meetings (see 8.2.1.2 and
10.2.1.2), Relief Society meetings (see 9.2.1.2), and Young Women meetings
(see 11.2.1.2)

Fifth Sundays: meetings for youth and adults. The bishopric determines the
topic and assigns teachers (usually members of the ward or stake). They also
determine whether youth and adults, male and female, meet separately or
together.  
  
---|---  
  
10 minutes

|

Transition to sacrament meeting  
  
60 minutes

|

Sacrament meeting  
  
When two wards meet in the same building and one or both have very few
children or youth, it may be desirable for the children or youth to attend
Sunday classes together. The wards’ Sunday meeting schedules could overlap as
shown below.

This plan may also be considered if the two wards use different languages but
the children and youth speak the same language.

Using this plan requires the stake president’s approval. If he approves, the
bishop of each ward meets with organization leaders to seek their counsel
about implementing it.

The two bishoprics meet together to determine which members from each ward
should be called to serve in quorums and organizations. Each bishop remains
the president of his priests quorum, but the two bishops may take turns
presiding in Sunday quorum meetings. The bishops from both wards attend
combined ward youth council meetings. After implementing the plan, leaders
continue to meet regularly to coordinate their efforts.

29.2.9

### Easter and Christmas

On Easter Sunday, sacrament meeting is the only meeting held. The same is true
when Christmas Day falls on a Sunday. When Christmas falls on another day of
the week, sacrament meeting is the only meeting held on a Sunday near
Christmas—usually the Sunday before—as determined by the stake presidency.

In some areas, a major non-Christian holiday is culturally significant. When
such a holiday falls on a Sunday, the Area Presidency may authorize bishops to
hold sacrament meeting only on that day.

Stake presidencies may consult with bishops to determine whether to adjust
start times for sacrament meetings on these Sundays.

29.3

## Stake Meetings

29.3.1

### Stake Conference

Purpose

The primary purpose of stake conference is to strengthen members’ faith in
Jesus Christ.

Participants

All are invited to attend the general session. Other sessions are for specific
participants, as described below.

Frequency

Twice each year.

Stake conferences are scheduled by the President of the Quorum of the Twelve
Apostles. Usually the stake president presides at one conference each year and
an assigned Area Seventy or General Authority presides at the other.

The presiding officer directs all planning for the conference. He approves
participants and musical selections in advance. For information about music in
stake conference, see 19.3.4.

When an Area Seventy or General Authority presides, he may invite the stake
president to suggest topics for instruction at the conference. When the stake
president presides, he and his counselors select topics. The stake presidency
may discuss possible topics with the stake council. In making these
selections, the stake presidency considers topics that the First Presidency
has emphasized recently.

As the stake president makes arrangements for stake conference, he may ask
priesthood quorums and other organizations, individuals, and families to help.
For example, they could be assigned to set up chairs, provide ushers, and
clean the building.

Each stake conference normally includes the following meetings:

  * A meeting of the Area Seventy or General Authority (if assigned) and the stake presidency. The stake clerk and executive secretary also attend.

  * A stake priesthood leadership meeting (see 29.3.3). The presiding authority determines whether this meeting is held on Saturday or Sunday. A member of the stake presidency conducts.

  * A Saturday evening session for all stake members 18 and older. Depending on local circumstances, this meeting may be held on Sunday if approved by the presiding authority. A member of the stake presidency conducts.

  * A general session, held on Sunday, for all members and others who would like to attend. The stake president conducts and speaks in this meeting. More than one Sunday general session may be held if there is not room for everyone in one session. Children attend with their families, not in a separate meeting.

If necessary, conference sessions may be streamed to meetinghouses or other
locations in the stake. Some members may need the conference to be streamed to
their homes. For more about streaming meetings, see 29.7.

Speakers in the general session should not use visual aids or audiovisual
materials (see 38.8.3).

If General Officers, the temple president and matron, the mission president
and companion, or the stake patriarch attend, they should sit on the stand.
The same is true for counselors in temple and mission presidencies (and their
spouses) if they attend in the place of the temple or mission president.

In one stake conference each year, a member of the stake presidency presents
general, area, and stake officers for sustaining. He uses the Officers
Sustained form, prepared by the stake clerk. This is usually done in the first
stake conference of the year.

If stake officers are called or released between stake conferences, they are
presented for sustaining or an expression of thanks in the next stake
conference. Or this can be done in each ward’s sacrament meeting. See 30.3 and
30.6.

Brethren who have been recommended to be ordained elders or high priests are
presented for sustaining in a stake conference. If a brother needs to be
ordained before the next stake conference, he may be sustained in his ward’s
sacrament meeting. His name would then be presented for ratifying in a stake
conference (see 18.10.3).

29.3.2

### Stake General Priesthood Meeting

Purpose

Instruct and inspire priesthood holders in their duties.

Participants

All priesthood holders in the stake.

Frequency

Once each year.

The stake presidency plans and conducts stake general priesthood meetings.
They prayerfully select subjects and speakers.

29.3.3

### Stake Priesthood Leadership Meeting

Purpose

Teach priesthood leaders their duties, increase their abilities, and
strengthen their faith.

Participants

  * Stake presidency.

  * High council.

  * Stake and ward clerks (and assistant clerks as needed).

  * Stake and ward executive secretaries.

  * Stake Young Men presidency (and secretary if called).

  * Bishoprics.

  * Elders quorum presidencies and secretaries.

  * Aaronic Priesthood quorum advisers.

The stake presidency may invite others to attend, such as ward mission leaders
and ward temple and family history leaders.

Frequency

A priesthood leadership meeting is held as part of each stake conference. The
stake presidency may schedule a third meeting each year.

The stake presidency plans and conducts stake priesthood leadership meetings.
The structure of these meetings is flexible. All participants may meet
together for the entire meeting. Or, after some general instruction, they may
separate into smaller groups for specific instruction based on their callings
and assignments.

The stake presidency and other stake leaders generally provide instruction.
Ward leaders, including women leaders, can also be invited to give instruction
on occasion.

29.3.4

### Stake Leadership Meetings

Purpose

Teach ward organization leaders their duties, help them improve as leaders and
teachers, and strengthen their faith in Jesus Christ. In these meetings,
leaders also counsel together and share ideas.

Participants

All stake and ward Relief Society, Young Women, Primary, and Sunday School
presidencies and secretaries. A member of the stake presidency or an assigned
high councilor attends and presides. Teachers, advisers, high councilors, and
bishopric members assigned to these organizations may also be invited.

Normally, the presidency of each organization schedules its own meeting.
However, the stake presidency may invite organizations to meet together.

Frequency

Once each year. The stake presidency may authorize a second meeting if it does
not create a burden for participants.

Stake organization presidencies plan and conduct stake leadership meetings.
The structure of these meetings is flexible. All leaders may meet together for
the entire meeting. Or, after some general instruction, they may separate into
smaller groups for specific instruction based on their callings and
assignments.

Organization leaders, stake presidency members, or other stake leaders
generally provide instruction. Ward organization leaders can also be invited
to give instruction on occasion.

The stake Young Men presidency does not hold a stake leadership meeting.
Instruction for those serving with Aaronic Priesthood quorums is given in
stake priesthood leadership meetings (see 29.3.3).

29.3.5

### Stake Presidency Meeting

Purpose

Counsel together and make decisions about matters concerning the stake.

Participants

The stake presidency, stake clerk, and executive secretary. The stake
president may invite others to attend as needed.

Frequency

Regularly (usually weekly).

The stake president plans and conducts stake presidency meetings. Matters for
consideration could include:

  * God’s work of salvation and exaltation in the stake.

  * Strengthening individuals and families in the stake.

  * The needs and strengths of wards, elders quorums, and other organizations in the stake.

  * Bishops’ recommendations of men to be ordained elders.

  * Members to call to stake positions and some ward positions as outlined in 30.8.

  * Bishops’ recommendations of members to serve missions.

  * Instructions from the scriptures, Church leaders, and this handbook.

Other items may include stake activities and programs, the stake budget,
reports on assignments, and plans for upcoming meetings.

29.3.6

### High Council Meeting

Purpose

Counsel together about God’s work of salvation and exaltation in the stake
(see 1.2).

Participants

  * Stake presidency.

  * High council.

  * Stake clerk and executive secretary.

The stake president may invite others to attend as needed.

Frequency

Twice a month if feasible.

The stake presidency plans and conducts high council meetings. These meetings
may include:

  * Receiving instruction from the stake presidency on doctrine and assignments.

  * Counseling together about strengthening individuals and families in the stake. Leader and Clerk Resources (LCR) has tools and reports that can help leaders be aware of the progress of members.

  * Discussing how to help accomplish God’s work of salvation and exaltation in the stake.

  * Reporting on assignments.

  * Counseling with the stake presidency and sustaining their decisions to ordain brethren as elders and high priests.

  * Counseling with the stake presidency and sustaining their decisions to issue callings.

  * Helping plan stake priesthood leadership meetings (see 29.3.3).

  * Hearing reports from returning missionaries (see 24.8.3).

Sometimes a brief high council meeting could be immediately followed by a
stake council meeting (see 29.3.7). This can help reduce the number of
meetings for leaders to attend.

To understand principles that guide council meetings in the Church, all
council members should study 4.3 and 4.4.

For information about participants joining the meeting remotely, see 29.7.

29.3.7

### Stake Council Meeting

Purpose

Counsel together about God’s work of salvation and exaltation in the stake
(see 1.2).

Participants

  * Stake presidency.

  * High council.

  * Stake clerk and executive secretary.

  * Stake Relief Society, Young Women, and Primary presidents (the stake Young Men and Sunday School presidents are present as members of the high council).

  * Stake young single adult leaders and single adult leaders (if called).

The stake president may invite others to attend as needed.

Frequency

Monthly if feasible.

The stake president plans and conducts stake council meetings. In these
meetings, council members may:

  * Receive instruction from the stake presidency on doctrine and on their assignments.

  * Counsel together about strengthening individuals and families in the stake. LCR has tools and reports that can help leaders be aware of the progress of members.

  * Discuss overall vision for God’s work of salvation and exaltation in the stake.

  * Discuss temporal needs of stake members and how to help them be self-reliant. Identify resources available in the community and stake. Examples may include local schools and BYU–Pathway Worldwide. (See 22.12 and 22.13.)

  * Develop and maintain a simple plan for the stake to respond to emergencies (see 22.9.1.3).

  * Plan ways for stake members to give service in the community (see 22.9.1). Where it is available, JustServe.org suggests opportunities for community service.

  * Report on stake organizations, activities, and programs.

Sometimes a stake council meeting could immediately follow a brief high
council meeting (see 29.3.6). This can help reduce the number of meetings for
leaders to attend.

To understand principles that guide council meetings in the Church, all
council members should study 4.3 and 4.4.

For information about participants joining the meeting remotely, see 29.7.

29.3.8

###  Stake Adult Leadership Committee Meeting

Purpose

Counsel together about how to support ward leaders as they assist in God’s
work of salvation and exaltation. Plan ways to help implement stake leaders’
vision for this work in the stake.

Participants

  * Stake presidency.

  * Stake Relief Society presidency (and secretary if called).

  * High councilors assigned to work with elders quorums.

The stake president may invite elders quorum presidents, ward Relief Society
presidents, and others to attend the committee’s meetings as needed.

Frequency

As needed.

The stake adult leadership committee supports elders quorum and ward Relief
Society presidencies in their work. Committee members give special emphasis to
ward efforts in ministering, sharing the gospel, strengthening new and
returning members, and participating in temple and family history work.

In addition, this committee coordinates stake efforts related to welfare and
self-reliance, including JustServe.org (where it is available) and BYU–Pathway
Worldwide (see 22.13).

The stake presidency plans and conducts meetings of the stake adult leadership
committee. These meetings could be extensions of stake council meetings. For
example, at the end of some stake council meetings, the adult leadership
committee could meet to continue a discussion about specific matters.

![youth council
meeting](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/imgs/07a76e074b3011ed9012eeeeac1e3ac5b5aa5daa/full/%21500%2C/0/default)

29.3.9

###  Stake Youth Leadership Committee Meeting

Purpose

Stake leaders and youth (1) counsel together about strengthening the youth of
the stake and (2) plan service and activities.

In addition, stake leaders counsel together about how to instruct and support
ward leaders in involving the youth in God’s work of salvation and exaltation.
They plan ways to help implement the stake council’s vision for the youth in
the stake.

Participants

  * A member of the stake presidency.

  * The stake Young Men presidency (and secretary if called).

  * The stake Young Women presidency (and secretary if called).

  * Youth from each ward in the stake when meetings or parts of meetings include matters that benefit from their involvement. Youth attend when discussions focus on strengthening youth and planning service and activities. The stake president determines the number of youth who attend. These could be youth serving in quorum and class presidencies or other youth invited by the stake presidency to be members of this committee.

Additional youth could be invited to help with specific needs or events.

The stake presidency may invite other leaders and advisers to attend as
needed.

Frequency

As needed.

The stake youth leadership committee supports bishoprics, Young Women
presidencies and advisers, and Aaronic Priesthood quorum advisers in their
work with youth. Adult leaders on the committee give special emphasis to
engaging youth in God’s work of salvation and exaltation.

The stake youth leadership committee has the following additional
responsibilities:

  * Plan service and activities. These could include youth conferences, dances, devotionals, service projects, and multistake events. (For service ideas, see JustServe.org where it is available.) Youth should lead out in planning and carrying out these activities. Stake activities should not be so frequent that they place a burden on wards. These activities should supplement ward activities, not compete with them. Ward leaders should be notified of stake activities well in advance.

  * Plan ways to support For the Strength of Youth conferences.

  * Coordinate stake efforts related to the Children and Youth program.

A member of the stake presidency oversees meetings of the stake youth
leadership committee. He may conduct, or he may assign someone else to do so,
including youth. These meetings could be extensions of stake council meetings.
For example, at the end of some stake council meetings, the youth leadership
committee could meet to continue a discussion about specific matters.

29.3.10

### Stake Bishops’ Council Meeting

Purpose

Share experiences, address questions, and provide instruction pertaining
specifically to bishops.

Participants

The stake president and all bishops and branch presidents in the stake are
members of this council. A stake clerk also attends to keep a record of
assignments and decisions. When needed, the stake president may invite his
counselors to attend. He may also invite bishops’ counselors to attend.

Frequency

At least quarterly.

Matters for discussion could include:

  * Helping youth progress spiritually.

  * Using fast offerings to care for those in need. Helping members build self-reliance (see chapter 22, especially 22.11). Sharing information about resources available in the community.

  * Helping members repent and experience a change of heart (see chapter 32).

  * Managing Church finances (see chapter 34).

The stake president leads this meeting. He helps bishops learn and fulfill
their principal responsibilities (see 7.1). He also invites bishops to counsel
about instruction from Church leaders.

This meeting does not take the place of the stake president’s regular
interviews with each bishop (see 6.2.1.2).

To understand principles that guide council meetings in the Church, all
council members should study 4.3 and 4.4.

![bishopric
meeting](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/imgs/1f0248044b3011ed9712eeeeac1ed50743d8b5fa/full/%21500%2C/0/default)

29.3.11

### Other Stake Meetings

Meetings of the stake single adult committee and stake young single adult
committee are described in 14.1.1.2.

29.4

## Coordinating Council Meetings

Purpose

Help stake, mission, and temple presidents exercise priesthood keys in unity.
Counsel about and coordinate efforts to help members in their responsibilities
to participate in God’s work of salvation and exaltation (see 1.2).

Participants

The Area Presidency assigns an Area Seventy to preside at the coordinating
council meeting. Stake and mission presidents attend the meetings. Temple
presidents are invited and attend when practical.

Others may attend part or all of the meetings when needed and when invited by
the Area Seventy. Area Seventies consider distance, family circumstances, and
travel when making these invitations.

Frequency

Quarterly, soon after each area council meeting. Additional meetings may be
held when needed.

The Area Seventy leads the meetings and facilitates the discussion. All who
attend counsel together as equal participants (see Doctrine and Covenants
88:122).

In these meetings, participants:

  * Seek revelation about how best to implement the teachings and direction of the First Presidency, Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and Area Presidency.

  * Coordinate God’s work of salvation and exaltation within their council.

  * Counsel together about the temporal and spiritual welfare of members and how to help them become true followers of Jesus Christ.

  * Instruct and edify one another.

  * Coordinate multistake matters.

29.5

## Funerals and Other Services for the Deceased

When a Church member dies, the bishop may offer to hold services to help
comfort the living and pay respectful tribute to the deceased. Services for
people who die vary according to religion, culture, tradition, and local laws.
The following instructions can help bishops plan gospel-centered services for
the deceased while respecting these variations.

29.5.1

### General Principles

Death is an essential part of Heavenly Father’s plan of salvation (see Alma
12:24–27). Because of Jesus Christ, all will be resurrected. An important
purpose of Church services for the deceased is to testify of the plan of
salvation, particularly the Savior’s Atonement and Resurrection. These
services should be dignified, spiritual experiences.

Church members should show respect for the practices of other religions at
times of death. However, they should not join rituals or traditions that are
contrary to the commandments or Church standards. Church leaders should not
include rituals of other religions or groups in Church services for the
deceased.

Members are counseled against practices or traditions that become a burden for
the living. Such practices may include excessive travel, elaborate public
announcements, payments to the family, prolonged feasts, and excessive
anniversary celebrations.

Church members who take part in services for the deceased should not accept
payment.

Church leaders and members obey local laws about what to do when someone dies.

29.5.2

### Offering Assistance to the Family

As disciples of Jesus Christ, Church leaders and members “mourn with those
that mourn … and comfort those that stand in need of comfort” (Mosiah 18:9).
When a member dies, the bishop visits the family to give comfort. He may ask
his counselors to accompany him. He also notifies the elders quorum and Relief
Society presidents.

The bishop offers assistance from ward members, including the elders quorum
and Relief Society. For example, ward members could:

  * Notify friends and relatives.

  * Help prepare an obituary.

  * Help plan the funeral or other service.

  * Help make mortuary and cemetery arrangements, as applicable.

  * Dress the body for burial (see 38.5.10).

  * Prepare meals.

29.5.3

### Viewings (Where Customary)

Sometimes a viewing of the body of the deceased is held at a Church
meetinghouse before the funeral service. Leaders should open the meetinghouse
for funeral directors at least one hour before the viewing is scheduled to
begin.

After the viewing, a family prayer may be offered if the family desires. The
casket should be closed before the funeral service.

29.5.4

### Funeral Services (Where Customary)

If a funeral for a member is held in a Church building, the bishop conducts
it. If it is held in a home, at a mortuary, or at the graveside, the family
may ask the bishop to conduct it. A bishop’s counselor may conduct if the
bishop cannot. For information about services held in a Church building for a
person who is not a member of the Church, see 29.5.6.

A funeral conducted by the bishop, whether in a Church building or elsewhere,
is a Church meeting and a religious service. It should be a spiritual
occasion. The bishop urges participants to maintain a spirit of reverence and
dignity.

When a bishop conducts a funeral, he or one of his counselors oversees the
planning of the service. He considers the wishes of the family, ensuring that
the funeral is simple and dignified, with music and brief addresses centered
on the gospel. The comfort offered by Jesus Christ because of His Atonement
and Resurrection should be emphasized. Family members are not required to
speak or otherwise participate in the service.

Funerals are an opportunity to pay tribute to the deceased. However, such
tributes should not dominate the service. A special family gathering, separate
from the funeral service, is usually a better setting if the family wants more
time to share tributes or memories.

Video presentations should not be part of a funeral service held in a chapel.

Funerals should start on time. Generally, they should not last more than 1.5
hours, as a courtesy to those who attend.

If a member of the stake presidency, an Area Seventy in his area, or a General
Authority attends the funeral, he presides. The person conducting consults him
in advance and recognizes him during the service. The presiding officer should
be invited to offer closing remarks if he desires.

Funeral services are not normally held on Sunday.

In some cases, the bishop can arrange with morticians to provide modest,
respectable funeral and burial services at cost if expenses are paid from
fast-offering funds.

For information about missionaries returning home to attend a funeral, see
24.6.2.7. For guidelines about streaming and recording funerals, see 29.7.

29.5.5

### Burial or Cremation

Where possible, deceased members who were endowed should be buried or cremated
in temple clothing. For information about temple burial clothing and dressing
the dead, see 38.5.10.

If possible, a member of the bishopric accompanies the cortege to the
cemetery. If the grave will be dedicated, he consults with the family and asks
a Melchizedek Priesthood holder to perform the dedication. Instructions are
provided in 18.16. If the family prefers, a graveside prayer can be offered
instead.

For information about dedicating the place where a cremated member’s ashes are
kept, see 18.16.2. For other guidelines about cremation, see 38.7.2.

29.5.6

### Services for Those Who Are Not Members of the Church

The bishop may offer the use of a Church meetinghouse for the funeral service
of a person who is not a member of the Church. If the deceased person belonged
to another church, the service may usually be held in the manner prescribed by
that church. If the family desires, the service may be conducted by clergy
from that church, provided it is dignified and appropriate. However, rituals
of other churches or organizations may not be performed in a Church
meetinghouse.

29.6

## Prayers in Church Meetings

Prayers in Church meetings should be brief, simple, and directed by the
Spirit. Any baptized Church member may offer an opening or closing prayer.
Children who are not baptized may pray in Primary. Leaders should avoid always
asking a husband and wife to pray in the same meeting.

Members should pray using words that express love and respect for Heavenly
Father. In English, this includes using the pronouns _Thee_ , _Thy_ , _Thine_
, and _Thou_ when addressing Him.

29.7

## Streaming Meetings and Holding Virtual Meetings

Church members should strive to attend meetings in person. There is a benefit
in gathering that enhances worship and helps unify members (see 29.0).

When this is not possible due to health or other reasons, streaming and
holding virtual meetings make it possible to include those who are not able to
attend. For the benefit of these members and others, the bishop may authorize
livestreaming of sacrament meetings (see 29.2.1.5), baptismal services,
funerals, and other ward meetings. The stake president may authorize
livestreaming of stake conference (see 29.3.1) and other stake meetings. For
guidance about streaming the sacrament and other ordinances, see 38.2.3.

Similarly, when members cannot attend Sunday classes or leadership meetings in
person, the bishop or stake president may authorize these members to
participate virtually.

Ward and stake technology specialists can help leaders set up streams and
virtual meetings (see 33.10). These individuals can also help members access
these meetings.

Stream recordings of ward and stake meetings should be deleted within one day
after the meeting.

29.8

## Photographs and Video Recordings of Meetings

To preserve the sacredness of Church meetings, no one should take photographs
or make video recordings of sacrament meetings or stake conferences.

For information about stream recordings of meetings, see 29.7.

29.9

## Interpreting for Meetings

The Lord wants everyone to understand the gospel in his or her own language
(see Doctrine and Covenants 90:11). In stakes where members speak more than
one native language, a member of the stake presidency may call a stake
interpretation coordinator. A bishop may call ward interpreters.

For more information, see Church Interpretation Training and Best Practices at
ChurchofJesusChrist.org.

