“25. Temple and Family History Work in the Ward and Stake,” General Handbook:
Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (2024).

“25. Temple and Family History Work in the Ward and Stake,” General Handbook.

![temple](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/imgs/e6e09bfa4b2b11ed997deeeeac1e384c326fbc0c/full/%21100%2C/0/default)

25.

# Temple and Family History Work in the Ward and Stake

25.0

## Introduction

The temple is the house of the Lord. Temple ordinances and covenants bless
Heavenly Father’s children. Heavenly Father invites all His children to
qualify for and receive temple ordinances.

Uniting families for eternity is part of God’s work of salvation and
exaltation (see 1.2). Temple and family history work is the means for uniting
and sealing families for eternity (see Matthew 16:19). This work includes:

  * Making covenants as we receive our own temple ordinances (see Isaiah 55:3; Doctrine and Covenants 84:19–23).

  * Discovering our deceased ancestors and performing ordinances for them in the temple so they can make covenants with God (see Malachi 4:5–6; 1 Corinthians 15:29; Doctrine and Covenants 128:15–18).

  * Going to the house of the Lord regularly, where possible, to worship God and perform ordinances for our ancestors (see Luke 24:52–53; Doctrine and Covenants 109:13–14).

This chapter guides Church leaders and members on how to unite families for
eternity through temple and family history work. More information is available
at “Temples,” “Proxy Baptism,” and “Family History” (Topics and Questions,
Gospel Library).

25.1

## Member and Leader Participation in Temple and Family History Work

Church members have the privilege and responsibility to help unite their
families for eternity. They prepare themselves to make covenants as they
receive temple ordinances. They strive to keep those covenants.

They also help family members understand, receive, and strive to keep temple
covenants. Parents have the primary responsibility to help their children
experience the blessings of temple and family history service for deceased
family members.

Church members are encouraged to identify their deceased relatives who have
not received temple ordinances. Members then perform the ordinances on behalf
of those relatives (see Doctrine and Covenants 128:18). In the spirit world,
deceased individuals can choose to accept or reject the ordinances that have
been performed for them.

Members also invite family and friends to learn about their ancestors and
discover their stories.

Many tools are available to help members in their temple and family history
work. Some of these are described in 25.4.1 and 25.4.2.

Church leaders support members in their temple and family history efforts as
described in 25.2 and 25.3.

25.1.1

### Individual Responsibility for Temple Worship

Members determine for themselves when and how often to worship in the temple.
Leaders do not establish quotas or reporting systems for temple worship.

Individual members and families who have current temple recommends may attend
any temple they desire. They may schedule an appointment with the temple. See
temples.ChurchofJesusChrist.org for each temple’s contact information.

25.1.2

### Ward and Stake Temple Trips

Each Church unit is assigned to a temple district. Organized ward or stake
visits to temples outside the assigned temple district are not encouraged.

All ward and stake temple trips should be scheduled with the temple. See
temples.ChurchofJesusChrist.org for each temple’s contact information.

25.2

## Organizing Temple and Family History Work in the Ward

Ward leaders have the following responsibilities for temple and family history
work in the ward:

  * Help individual members prepare to make covenants with God by receiving temple ordinances (see 27.1).

  * Encourage members to worship in the house of the Lord as often as their circumstances allow.

  * Encourage individuals and families to learn the doctrine and blessings of temple and family history work.

  * Ensure that the doctrine and blessings of temple and family history work are taught regularly during Church meetings. This work unites families for eternity.

  * Encourage members to learn about their ancestors and perform temple ordinances on their behalf.

  * Support parents in helping their children participate in temple and family history work.

  * Encourage all youth and adult members, including new members, to have a current temple recommend.

See chapter 26 for information about temple recommends.

25.2.1

### Bishopric

The bishopric coordinates with the elders quorum and Relief Society
presidencies as they lead the ward’s temple and family history efforts. These
leaders counsel together regularly.

The bishopric also has the following additional responsibilities for temple
and family history work:

  * Coordinate with the elders quorum and Relief Society presidencies as they lead the ward’s temple and family history work (see 25.2.2).

  * Ensure that temple and family history work is coordinated in ward council and ward youth council meetings.

  * Review and approve the ward temple and family history plan (see 25.2.6).

  * Oversee the organization of temple preparation courses (see 25.2.8).

  * Issue temple recommends (see chapter 26).

The bishopric consults with the stake president to determine whether to call a
ward temple and family history leader (see 25.2.3 for more information).

25.2.2

### Elders Quorum and Relief Society Presidencies

The elders quorum and Relief Society presidencies lead the day-to-day temple
and family history efforts in the ward (see 8.2.4 and 9.2.4). The elders
quorum presidency leads these efforts for members of the elders quorum. The
Relief Society presidency leads the efforts for members of the Relief Society.
They work together to lead these efforts with the ward council, under the
coordination of the bishop.

These leaders have the following additional responsibilities:

  * Ask a ward temple and family history consultant to help ward members who have recently received mission calls to find and prepare deceased ancestors’ names for temple ordinances.

  * Help the ward council develop and implement the ward temple and family history plan (see 25.2.6).

  * Ensure that temple and family history work is planned and reported in ward council meetings and in ward temple and family history coordination meetings.

  * Lead the work of the ward temple and family history leader. If this leader is not called, a member of the elders quorum presidency fills this role (see 25.2.3).

The elders quorum and Relief Society presidents each assign a presidency
member to help lead temple and family history work in the ward. These two
presidency members work together. They attend ward temple and family history
coordination meetings (see 25.2.7).

![youth outside
temple](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/imgs/1a206f154b3011eda531eeeeac1ecaeef43b20f4/full/%21500%2C/0/default)

25.2.3

###  Ward Temple and Family History Leader

The bishopric consults with the stake president to determine whether to call a
ward temple and family history leader. If they decide to extend this calling,
the bishopric counsels with the elders quorum and Relief Society presidents in
determining whom to call. This person should be a Melchizedek Priesthood
holder. If this leader is not called, a member of the elders quorum presidency
fills this role.

The ward temple and family history leader supports the elders quorum and
Relief Society presidencies in their temple and family history
responsibilities. He also has the following responsibilities:

  * Coordinate temple and family history efforts with ward organization leaders, including youth quorum and class presidencies.

  * Lead ward temple and family history coordination meetings (see 25.2.7).

  * Attend ward council meetings when invited.

  * Help the ward council develop and implement the ward temple and family history plan (see 25.2.6).

  * Instruct ward temple and family history consultants. Coordinate their efforts to help members find names of ancestors and perform temple ordinances on their behalf.

  * Work with the ward mission leader and the missionaries to help those learning the gospel, new members, and returning members engage in temple and family history work (see 23.2 and 23.3).

  * Where applicable, assign ward temple and family history consultants to serve in the FamilySearch center (see 25.3.6).

25.2.4

### Ward Temple and Family History Consultants

Ward temple and family history consultants serve under the direction of the
ward temple and family history leader. The bishopric calls these members to
serve. Adults and youth may be called. The elders quorum, Relief Society, and
Young Women presidents may suggest who could serve.

Consultants teach others in simple ways how to participate in temple and
family history work. They have the following responsibilities:

  * Help members prepare to receive temple ordinances and make temple covenants.

  * Help members experience the blessings of discovering their ancestors and performing temple ordinances on their behalf. These experiences are especially important for those learning the gospel, new and returning members, and those preparing to receive a recommend for proxy baptisms and confirmations.

  * Participate in temple and family history coordination meetings (see 25.2.7).

  * Serve in a local FamilySearch center when assigned (see 25.3.6).

Resources to help temple and family history consultants are listed in 25.4.1
and 25.4.2.

25.2.5

### Ward Council

Members of the ward council prayerfully develop and implement a ward temple
and family history plan. For information about the plan, see 25.2.6.

The bishop may invite the ward temple and family history leader to attend ward
council meetings.

25.2.6

### Ward Temple and Family History Plan

Each ward should have a simple temple and family history plan. This plan helps
ward members, including children and youth, prepare to worship in the house of
the Lord and participate in family history work as often as their
circumstances allow.

The elders quorum and Relief Society presidents help the ward council develop
the plan. The ward temple and family history leader also helps. In developing
the plan, they:

  * Prayerfully consider members’ needs and the available resources.

  * Identify actions to take during the year.

  * Determine how to implement the plan and make assignments accordingly.

Examples of what the plan might include are listed below:

  * Help specific members prepare to receive temple ordinances.

  * Help members build their family trees on FamilySearch.org or with the FamilySearch Family Tree app (see 25.4.1).

  * Help members use the Ordinances Ready feature on FamilySearch.org or the FamilySearch Family Tree app to take the name of an ancestor to the temple.

  * Involve new and returning members, youth, and children in temple and family history work.

The ward temple and family history plan should not establish quotas or
reporting systems for temple worship (see 25.1.1).

The bishop reviews and approves the plan. Members of the ward council take the
lead in implementing it. They report on progress in ward council meetings.
They also update the plan as needed.

![](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/imgs/https%3A%2F%2Fwww.churchofjesuschrist.org%2Fimgs%2F886999708076dbf09ad533958c83f683c1dc7440%2Ffull%2F%2521768%252C%2F0%2Fdefault/full/!250,/0/default)

2:49

Helping Members Gain the Vision

25.2.7

### Ward Temple and Family History Coordination Meetings

Brief informal ward temple and family history coordination meetings are held
regularly. The ward temple and family history leader conducts these meetings.

Others who are invited include:

  * Assigned members of the Relief Society and elders quorum presidencies.

  * An assistant in the priests quorum (or the teachers or deacons quorum president if there are no priests in the ward).

  * A presidency member of the oldest Young Women class.

  * Temple and family history consultants.

All who attend, including the youth, counsel together as equal participants.
The purpose of these meetings is to:

  * Coordinate efforts to implement the ward temple and family history plan (see 25.2.6).

  * Plan how to help specific ward members prepare to receive temple ordinances.

  * Plan how to help specific ward members with their temple and family history work.

These meetings may be held in person or remotely. Coordination can also happen
in other ways, including phone calls, texts, and emails.

25.2.8

### Temple Preparation Course

Under the bishop’s direction, a temple preparation course may be organized to
help members prepare to make covenants as they receive temple ordinances.
These courses are held outside of regular Sunday meetings at a time convenient
for members. They may be held at a meetinghouse or in a home.

Ward council members prayerfully select members to invite to participate in
each course. These courses may be especially helpful for the following people:

  * New members

  * Members preparing to receive their own endowment or to be sealed

  * Members returning to Church activity

  * Endowed members who have not renewed their temple recommends for an extended time

The bishopric calls one or more temple preparation instructors. Lessons and
instructions for organizing the course are in Endowed from on High: Temple
Preparation Seminar Teacher’s Manual. Participants are given copies of
Preparing to Enter the Holy Temple. For personal study and lesson resources,
see temples.ChurchofJesusChrist.org.

25.3

## Organizing Temple and Family History Work in the Stake

Stake leaders support ward leaders and members in their temple and family
history efforts.

25.3.1

### Stake Presidency

The stake president holds the keys for God’s work of salvation and exaltation
in the stake. He and his counselors have the following responsibilities for
the temple and family history aspect of that work:

  * Help members prepare to make sacred covenants as they receive temple ordinances (see 27.1).

  * Encourage members to worship in the house of the Lord as often as their circumstances allow.

  * Ensure that the doctrine and blessings of temple and family history work are taught regularly in stake meetings. This work unites families for eternity.

  * Encourage members to learn about their ancestors and perform temple ordinances on their behalf.

  * Conduct temple recommend interviews (see chapter 26).

In his regular meeting with each elders quorum president, a member of the
stake presidency discusses temple and family history work in the ward (see
8.3.1). The counselors in the elders quorum presidency and the high councilor
assigned to the quorum may attend.

25.3.2

### Stake Adult Leadership Committee

The stake adult leadership committee includes:

  * The stake presidency.

  * The stake Relief Society presidency.

  * High councilors assigned to work with elders quorums.

These leaders instruct and support elders quorum and Relief Society
presidencies in their responsibilities for temple and family history work (see
25.2.2). Instruction could take place in a group setting or individually. Ward
temple and family history leaders may be invited to receive this instruction.

For more about this committee’s meetings, see 29.3.8.

25.3.3

### High Councilors

The stake presidency may assign high councilors to instruct and support the
following people in their responsibilities for temple and family history work:

  * Elders quorum presidencies

  * Ward temple and family history leaders

  * Stake temple and family history consultants

  * FamilySearch center coordinators

One or more high councilors may be assigned to lead these efforts. However,
all high councilors have these responsibilities for the wards and quorums to
which they are assigned.

High councilors may help ward temple and family history leaders instruct ward
temple and family history consultants. High councilors may be assisted by
stake temple and family history consultants.

The stake presidency may assign a high councilor to coordinate the stake’s
family history volunteer efforts (see 25.4.3). He or another high councilor
may be assigned to oversee the work in FamilySearch centers (see 25.3.6).

25.3.4

### Stake Relief Society Presidency

Under the direction of the stake president, the stake Relief Society
presidency instructs and supports ward Relief Society presidencies in their
responsibilities for temple and family history work (see 9.2.4).

25.3.5

###  Stake Temple and Family History Consultants

Stake temple and family history consultants support temple and family history
work throughout the stake. They serve under the direction of the stake
presidency and one or more high councilors assigned to temple and family
history work.

These consultants support high councilors and the stake Relief Society
presidency in their efforts to instruct others in temple and family history
work (see 25.3.3 and 25.3.4). They may also be given the following
assignments:

  * Help teach and support members in ward temple and family history callings.

  * Help coordinate volunteer efforts using FamilySearch.org or the FamilySearch apps (see 25.4.3).

  * Serve in FamilySearch centers (see 25.3.6).

25.3.6

###  FamilySearch Centers

If resources are available, the stake may organize one or more FamilySearch
centers. These centers are to help visitors discover, gather information
about, and unite both living and deceased family members through temple
ordinances. Anyone is welcome to use these centers.

The stake president calls a FamilySearch center coordinator to oversee efforts
in each FamilySearch center. Each center is generally staffed by assigned
stake and ward temple and family history consultants. FamilySearch centers
should be open at convenient times. FamilySearch centers near temples may
adjust their schedules to align with the local temple’s schedule.

As an exception, some large FamilySearch centers are overseen by Area
Presidencies.

25.3.7

### FamilySearch Center Coordinator

The FamilySearch center coordinator organizes the daily operations of the
FamilySearch center. He or she serves under the direction of the stake
president or an assigned high councilor. Responsibilities may include those
listed below:

  * Help members prepare family names so they can perform ordinances in the house of the Lord.

  * Coordinate the center’s activities to help Church members and community visitors discover their ancestors.

  * Work with (1) the high councilor who is assigned to support temple and family history work and (2) the stake technology specialist to meet the center’s operational needs and maintain its resources.

The FamilySearch Center Operations Guide provides guidance on how to operate a
FamilySearch center.

25.3.8

### Area Temple and Family History Advisers

Area Presidencies may call area temple and family history advisers. If
circumstances allow, one person or one couple can be called for each
coordinating council. Advisers typically serve for three to five years.

The Area Presidency may assign Area Seventies to coordinate the work of these
advisers in coordinating councils. Advisers’ work should align with the area’s
focus.

As directed by the Area Presidency and Area Seventies, advisers help stake
presidents fulfill their responsibilities for temple and family history work.
Advisers assist stake presidents in teaching people who serve in the following
callings about their responsibilities:

  * High councilors

  * Stake Relief Society presidencies

  * Stake adult leadership committees

  * Stake temple and family history consultants

  * FamilySearch center coordinators

Advisers may be assigned to help stake presidencies prepare members for
worship in newly announced temples within the area. Other responsibilities
might include instructing stake leaders on the principles and practices of
temple and family history work. These include:

  * How to help members with their first experience with proxy baptisms and confirmations (see 23.2).

  * How to help members who are preparing to receive their own endowment or be sealed (see 25.2.8, 27.2, 27.3, and 27.4).

  * How to organize temple and family history work in the stake and wards (see 25.3 and 25.2).

  * How to support elders quorum and Relief Society presidencies in their responsibilities (see 25.2.2).

  * How temple and family history work can bless children and youth (see 10.2.4, 11.2.4, and 12.2.4).

  * How to help members have a meaningful family history experience (see Temple and Family History Leadership Instruction).

  * How to hold effective temple and family history coordination meetings (see 25.2.7).

  * How to help ward leaders plan and set goals (see 25.2.6).

25.4

## Family History Resources

25.4.1

### FamilySearch.org, Ordinances Ready, and FamilySearch Apps

FamilySearch.org is the Church’s website to help members find and prepare
their ancestors’ names for temple ordinances. Ordinances Ready is one feature
on FamilySearch.org that provides an easy way to receive family or other names
to take to the temple.

The site also provides additional resources. These include discovering,
sharing, and preserving ancestors’ stories and photographs.

These resources are also available in the FamilySearch Family Tree app and
FamilySearch Memories app. See FamilySearch apps for all available apps.

![family looking at
photos](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/imgs/016cbbdb4b3011edbf70eeeeac1eec566d069212/full/%21500%2C/0/default)

25.4.2

### My Family: Stories That Bring Us Together

The booklet My Family: Stories That Bring Us Together helps people gather and
preserve family names and stories. It can also help members begin to prepare
family names for temple ordinances.

Physical copies of the booklet can be ordered at
store.ChurchofJesusChrist.org.

25.4.3

### Family History Volunteer Activities

The “Get Involved” tab on FamilySearch.org allows volunteers to participate in
the following activities:

  * Indexing, which is a process of entering information from a written historical record into a searchable database on FamilySearch.org.

  * Reviewing records for accuracy.

  * Improving the accuracy of Family Tree.

Those who participate in these activities make it possible for others to
discover their ancestors and perform temple ordinances on their behalf.

Anyone can participate in volunteer activities on FamilySearch.org. This can
be a particularly fulfilling experience for the following:

  * Youth

  * Young adults

  * Members who are unable to attend Church meetings regularly

  * New members

  * General public

The stake presidency may assign a stake temple and family history consultant
or a high councilor to coordinate this work.

25.5

## Recommending and Calling Temple Workers

25.5.1

### Recommending Temple Workers

Potential temple workers are identified in the following ways:

  * Members identified by the bishop or another ward leader

  * Members who approach the bishop about serving

  * Members recommended by the temple president, the matron, or another temple leader

  * Members who are preparing for or have recently returned from missionary service (see chapter 24)

The names of potential temple workers are submitted using the Recommend Temple
Worker tool. This tool is available to bishops, stake presidents, and temple
presidencies. The process for submitting names is outlined below.

When members of a temple presidency identify a potential temple worker, they
submit the person’s name to the bishop using the Recommend Temple Worker tool.

When a bishop identifies a potential temple worker or receives a
recommendation from a temple president, he counsels with the member about the
opportunity to serve. He reviews the requirements for temple workers (see
25.5.2). If both the bishop and the member feel the opportunity would be
appropriate, the bishop completes and submits the recommendation using the
Recommend Temple Worker tool. The member should understand that a submitted
recommendation does not ensure that he or she will be called or assigned as a
temple worker.

The recommendation is next reviewed by the stake president. If the stake
president approves the recommendation, he submits it to the temple president
for review using the Recommend Temple Worker tool.

Members who are called or assigned as temple workers normally commit to a
regular time to serve in the temple each week. Leaders should avoid issuing
additional callings that would interfere with members’ ability to serve in the
temple.

The Recommend Temple Worker tool also shows bishops and stake presidents a
list of all members from their wards or stakes who currently serve as temple
workers.

25.5.2

### Requirements for Temple Workers

Temple workers help perform ordinances or assist with administrative tasks in
the temple. To be recommended as a temple worker, a member must meet the
following qualifications:

  * Reside in the temple district of the temple where he or she will serve.

  * Be endowed, honor temple covenants, and have a current temple recommend.

  * Have a strong testimony of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

  * Be physically able to administer ordinances without assistance.

  * Be worthy of respect in the Church and in the community.

  * Work well with other people.

  * Be dependable and in good health.

  * Not currently have an annotation on his or her membership record.

In addition, the bishop ensures the following:

  * If a person’s membership was formally restricted, he or she may be recommended as a temple worker no sooner than five years after the restrictions were removed. (See 32.11.3 and 32.16.1.)

  * If an unendowed person’s membership was withdrawn, or if the person resigned membership, he or she may be recommended as a temple worker no sooner than five years after being readmitted to the Church. (See 32.11.4, 32.14.9, 32.16.1, and 32.16.2.)

  * If an endowed person’s membership was withdrawn, or if the person resigned membership, he or she may be recommended as a temple worker no sooner than five years after receiving a restoration of blessings. (See 32.11.4, 32.14.9, and 32.17.2.)

25.5.3

### Calling and Setting Apart Temple Workers

After the temple president receives the recommendation for someone to serve as
a temple worker, a member of the temple presidency or someone he designates
interviews the person. As inspired, the person conducting the interview calls
those who are able to serve as temple workers and sets them apart.

